# Witchcraft


https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_sylva-sylvarum_bacon-sir-francis_1664/page/n251/mode/2up?q=%22witches+ointment%22
Sylva sylvarum:...  1664
by Bacon, Sir Francis

Publication date 1664
p213.

3`[975]` The *Ointment* that *Witches* use is reported to be made of the *Fat of Children* digged out of their *Graves*; of the juices of *Smallage*, *Woolf-bane*, and *Cinquefoil*, mingled with the *Meal* of fine *Wpheat*. But I suppose that the *soporiferous Medicines* are likest to doe it; which are *Henbane*, *Hemlock*, *Mandrake*, *Moon-shade*, *Tobacco*, *Opium*, *Saffron*, *Poplar-leaves*, &c.

---
witches



https://archive.org/details/pottsdiscoveryof00pottrich/page/n305/mode/2up?q=%22witches+ointment%22+unbaptized
Pott's Discovery of witches in the county of Lancaster
by Potts, Thomas, fl. 1612-1618; Bromley, Edward, Sir; Crossley, James, 1800-1883

Publication date 1745 [i.e. 1845]

TO DO

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000492/18260717/009/0002
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000492/18270416/035/0004


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18270711/001/0004
Hereford Journal - Wednesday 11 July 1827

Also in e.g.* Hampshire Advertiser*, [Monday 09 July 1827](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000492/18270709/059/0004).


*Witch Burning in Dublin.*— On Saint John's Day, Sunday the 24th of June, 1827, about four o'clock in the afternoon, an immense crowd of men, women, and children (between three and five hundred persons), were observed rushing down Marlborough-street, near to Thomas's church, shouting and yelling, and tossing up something in the air, which was sometimes caught by one, and sometimes by another, and occasionally fell to the earth, where there was a scramble for it, and was again tossed from one to another, amidst the most diabolical veils, which, on a nearer approach, were distinguished to be "A witch!" "A witch!" "Burn the witch!" "Drown the witch!" She proved to be a decently-dressed, dwarfish, deformed female, whom these monsters had suddenly seized upon; and whenever she fell to the earth, during their tossings, fiend-like women rushed upon her with horrid shrieks, tearing her clothes to pieces, all parties crying out, "Now we have her! now we have her!" "We'll burn or drown her!" and directing their course to the river. At length young gentleman, apparently about eighteen, after appealing to several well-dressed spectators to aid him in saving the poor woman from being torn to pieces, which they, from terror of the mob, declined doing—rushed into the midst of these hell-hounds, and bore the helpless female under one arm, while with the other he made his way through the crowd, who then directed their vengeance against him, crying out, "The witch's husband the witch's husband!"—pushing, pulling, and tripping him, and pelting him with mud, and whatever came to their hands: so that he was bedaubed from head to foot. In making his way down Cumberland-street and Mecklenburgh-street, he appealed to three or four soldiers who were looking on, who directly surrounded him, and two gentlemen then aided him, one of them taking one hand, and her rescuer the other of the poor sinking dwarf, and pulled her through the increasing crowd, to the police-office in Henry-street for safety; the new escort came in for their share of mud and abuse. At the post-office a few policemen luckily came up, and were compelled to ample justice with their sticks on the savage crowd, before they got the poor creature into the police-office. She was not able to speak for some time, from ill usage and terror — and then returned lively thanks to her deliverers; she gave her name, and said she resided with relative, Mr. ———,at No. ———, in Camden-street; and observed, that though she had been frequently gazed at, so as to distress her feelings, she had never before met with violence. She was sent home the back way, after sometime, with an escort of police. The transaction can be borne testimony to hundreds of persons in the neighbourhood above mentioned, for the disturbance was such, that every window was thrown up as the savages approached. And this is in the capital of Ireland! and in the nineteenth century!—*Warder.*


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001643/18400919/073/0004
Macclesfield Courier and Herald - Saturday 19 September 1840

WITCHCRAFT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.—The *Worcester Chronicle* says:—The following lamentable instance of superstition occurred in Lich-street, in this city, on Saturday last:—The infant daughter of Thos. Pitt, a labourer, residing in the above street, had for some tune been suffering from severe inflammation of the face and gums, consequent on the process of 'teething,' and the usual domestic remedies having proved unavailing, the mother of the child was induced, by the pressing solicitations of the neighbouring gossips to seek the abode of a certain 'wise woman,' *alias* 'The Witch of Sudbury,' for the purpose of having her infant 'charmed,' a process which, it was averred, would speedily eradicate the disorder. Manifold were the testimonies borne in favour of the 'charm,' and numerous instances adduced where the restoration of strayed cattle, the cure of broken heads, and the detection of stolen properly, had been achieved by means of its potent influence. Accordingly, having previously fortified herself against the machinations of 'the gentleman in black,' by attaching a sprig of rosemary and a leaf of the Bible to the hem of her garment, the creditless parent bent her steps towards the dwelling of the reputed 'witch,' to whom she made known the purport of her visit. The 'weird sister,' after indulging in several mysterious shakes of the head, crossings of the palm,uod other gestures of equally cabalistic import, took the infant in her arms, and commenced the ceremony of 'charming.' This consisted in sprinkling the head of the child with common salt, and affixing round its neck a strip of virgin parchment, accompanying the operation by a species of low monotonous chaunt, occasionally varied by a rapid enunciation of incoherent gibberish, which savoured strongly of the ravings of insanity. At the conclusion of this absurd farce, which lasted about ten minutes, the 'wise woman' resigned the child to the care of its maternal protector, gravely assuring her not only of its speedy recovery, owing to the sovereign virtue of the 'charm,' but of its future exemption from the thousand ills that flesh is heir to.' And—such is the power of superstition—the mother of the infant not only entertains a devout belief is the efficacy of the above named rite, but loudly vaunts the benefit already derived from it in the present case, her dear little child having, as she affirms, recovered most *charm*-ingly since her recent visit to the 'Witch Of Sudbury'.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002216/18751217/049/0005
Stroud News and Gloucestershire Advertiser - Friday 17 December 1875

A very singular charge of murder tried at the Warwick Assizes on Wednesday, before Baron Bramwell. James Haywood, agricultural labourer, 40 years of age, and a Wesleyan, was charged with the wilful murder of Anne Tenant, at Long Compton, Warwickshire. It was proved in evidence that fully one-third of the villagers believed in witchcraft. The prisoner, believing in the common suspicion, stabbed the deceased, who was eighty years of age, with a pitchfork, under the impression that she was one of fifteen witches that he ought to kill. It was admitted that on all other subjects he was sane. He justified his conduct by referring to verses from Leviticus:—"A man also or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard. should be put to death; they shall stone them with stones; their blood shall be upon them." The Judge said such a prevalence of this superstition would be disgraceful to savages.—The prisoner was found to have been insane at the time and was ordered to be kept in confinement during her Majesty's pleasure.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003185/18751225/028/0006
Clare Advertiser and Kilrush Gazette - Saturday 25 December 1875

WITCHCRAFT IN SOUTH WARWICKSHIRE.

(From the "Times.")

It will be with some sense of shame that our readers will think of the Assize Intelligence from the Midland Cireuit. They will learn from it that a firm belief in witchcraft still survives in an entire district of South Warwickshire: that it has already, at Long Compton, proved fatal to one victim who was suspected of the injurious practice, and that it has endangered the lives of a good many more who have been in the same sort of ill-repute among their village neighbours. The details of the case are very shocking. Ann Tennant, the sufferer, was, it need hardly be said, an old woman, of harmless character, whose ill fame as a witch depended upon her sex and age, and absolutely upon nothing else. Her assailant, James Haywood, was a labouring man, whose powers of imagination assisted by the roguery of a "wise man" of the neighbourhood, had convinced him that poor old Ann Tennant had used her supernatural powers to unfit him for his work: that she had set her eyes upon him, and possessed him, and a good deal more of the kind, all pointing to himself as the unhappy subject and to Ann Tennatt and other old women of the place as the active agents of mischief to him. With a belief of this sort, it was only natural that Haywood should wish to free himself from the evil influences by which he was oppressed. If he could draw blood from Ann Tennant, her power over him would then cease; and this, with the aid of a pitchfork, he did with such good will that the poor old creature died the next day from her wounds, and James Haywood has been put upon his trial as her murderer. His justification for the act was partly drawn from the beneficial consequences to himself which he had reason to believe would follow from it, partly from the wickedness of Ann Tennant, whose fate as a witch had been nothing more than she had deserved. His counsel, with better judgment, urged the plea of insanity on his behalf, and this was supported in some degree by the evidence of his neighbours, and by the medical men who had seen and talked with him in prison. It came out, indeed, during the course of his trial that his delusion was so far from being singular that it represented rather the common belief of Long Compton and of other villages of South Warwickshire, though it does not seem in other cases to have been followed out with the same fatal consistency. The jury, however, under the merciful direction of Baron Bramwell, have brought in a verdict of acquittal. Haywood will accordingly be detained as a lunatic during her Majesty's pleasure, and, as he has made no secret of his intention to kill fifteen or sixteen more old women as soon as the chance offers, we can hardly suppose that he will be lightly suffered to be at large again. We join very heartily in the hope expressed by Baron Bramwell that something will be done to disabuse the people of Long Compton of their discreditable belief in witchcraft, and we share the regret of James Haywood's counsel that the "wise man from somewhere near Banbury" was not on his trial for practising on his neighbour's folly.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001670/18751218/059/0004
Warwick and Warwickshire Advertiser - Saturday 18 December 1875

TO DO

MURDER OF AN AGED WOMAN: EXTRAORDINARY SUPERSTITION.

TO DO (long)

After a few minutes' deliberation, the jury returned a verdict of "Not guilty on grounds of insanity."

His Lordship said he had clearly laid down the law to the jury, and could not help their verdict. He then directed that the prisoner should be detained during her Majesty's pleasure. He did wish something could be done to disabuse the minds of the people of the village of the belief of witchcraft. It was a most mournful and melancholy state of ignorance. He did not know whether the jury could say anything which might have a good effect in the direction indicated.

The jury made no comment, and the Court then adjourned for luncheon.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18751218/036/0005
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 18 December 1875

WITCHCRAFT IN WARWICKSHIRE.

EXTRAORDINARY TRIAL FOR MURDER.

At the Warwick winter assists on Wednesday, before Baron Bramwell, James Haywood, 45, a half-witted farm labourer, was indicted for having murdered Ann Tennant, at Long Compton (Warwickshire, near the border of Gloucestershire), on the 5th of September. Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Chamberlayne were for the prosecution, and Mr. Buszard, at the request of the Judge, defended.

John Tennant, a labourer, living at Long Compton, said he would be seventy-nine years of age "come Christmas-day." The deceased was his wife, and "come April next" she would have been eighty years of age. She was in good health on the evening of the day named, and went out to get some bread and tea. When she was returning she met with "this 'ere customer." His father and mother always "harboured this 'ere about witches," and would frequently say, "They are at the boy again; they woant let him alone." By that they meant that the witches were at the prisoner. There was nothing in it.— In cross-examination, witness said that the prisoner was always a curious sort of hand in the village. He always wanted more money for his work than other people, and yet he was not a skilful hand. He was not considered to be quite right by the farmers. Witness had heard that prisoner had been injured in his head, but could not say whether it was true. He was a man who would drink any quantity of gin or liquor that could be put before him, and then he would go mad after. Prisoner never told him that his inside was full of witches, and that they were killing him.

John Evens, a boy of fifteen, said on the evening of the date named he and another boy were walking with the prisoner from a field in which he had been working that day. Prisoner had a fork and a bottle in his hand. As they were walking "to and fro" they met the deceased. Prisoner stuck the fork into her legs three times. He told witness that there were many witches in Long Compton, and he would kill two of them, Betsy Ford and Betsy Hughes.—Cross-examined, the witness said the fork was the one the prisoner had been at work with that day. He was looked upon by the boys of the village as a "sort of witch man."—To the Judge: I go to school. I don't believe in witchcraft.

James Taylor, farmer, at Long Compton, stated that while he was in his orchard he heard a cry in the road, "Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Oh dear, Oh!" Witness went into the road, and saw the prisoner knock the poor old lady down with a fork. Witness rescued the deceased. Prisoner said there were fifteen or sixteen witches in the village, and he had killed one of them. He had known the prisoner for a long time. He was a man who knew how to take work by the piece, and also how to do it.— Mr. Dugdale: As a general farm labourer, and as an ordinary man, what do you say of him?— Witness: Well, I think he was rather strange sometimes, he was a man who knew how to take a job, and how to do it. He was rather strange about "familiar spirits." He said they had been haunting him for three hours that day.—Mr. Buszard: He was looked upon as a strange man in the village?—Not particularly so. When he had beer he was wild and excitable. He told me that the witches were working inside him. I was told that he had been to consult a "wise man" at Coughten.—Mr. Buszard: Did not the village people look upon him as a wild sort of man?—Witness: No, he was as right as you or me when he had no beer (laughter).—Mr. Buszard: Well, I must say, I must decline the test for myself (renewed laughter).—Witness said he believed there was one-third of the people in the village who believed in withcraft. He did not believe in it himself.—The Judge: I should think you need not deny anything so utterly absurd.—Witnese (to the Judge): There were many persons in the village whom he knew to be popularly regarded as witches. They were all old women, and mostly widows. He did not know an instance of a young woman or a sick old woman being suspected of being a witch.

Elizabeth Hughes, a decently-dressed woman, was next sworn. As soon as she appeared the prisoner became excited, and called out "There is another witch there." One of the warders here stopped him, but the Judge interfered and wished him to go on. The prisoner, however, made no further remark, but kept his eyes fixed on the witness for several minutes.

The witness went on to say that the deceased was her mother, and that the affair took place in the road a short distance from her residence. Hearing a scream she went into the road, and found her mother lying on the ground bleeding. Mr. Taylor was standing by, holding the prisoner, who exclaimed "I have done it; I have done it. I meant to do it. There are several more I will serve the same." Her mother died shortly after.

To Mr. Buszard—I have heard him talk about witches, but I never took any notice of him, he was so full of wickedness. I have heard him say the witches were tormenting him. He said to me once that I had better keep from the old women, else they would make me a witch as bad as themselves. I told him I did not believe such nonsense.

P.C. Simpson, who arrived on the spot immediately after the deceased had been stabbed, took the prisoner into custody. He said "I must take you to the lockup, and I am afraid you have killed that old woman." Prisoner said "It is no odds about it. I hope she is dead. There's a lot more I shall serve the same. There is fourteen or fifteen more." He said that they had kept him for three hours in the beans that day. Witness considered that he was under the influence of drink, as on his way to the station prisoner looked up twice and said "Who are you? Are you a policeman?"

In cross-examination witness said—I feel sure there are many people in Long Compton who believe in witchcraft. The prisoner was usually a quiet sort of man. Many of the people in the village who believed in witchcraft attended places of worship. I cannot say that the prisoner attended any place of worship, but I know his father and mother do.

Supt. Thompson, of Shipston, said that while the prisoner was in his custody he told him Mrs. Tennant was dead, and the charge was one of murder. He said "Dead?" Witness replied "Yee." Prisoner said "Well, I did not kill her outright." Witness told him to be careful, as what he said would be given in evidence against him. Prisoner replied "Then we will not have anything the matter." The next morning prisoner said he should like witness to see the water in the jug, where he could see the witches if he was bewitched.

To Mr. Buszard—He did not appear to realise his position, nor to he conscious that be hail done wrong.

Mr. Hutchinson, surgeon at Long Compton, proved that death resulted from several varicose veins having been punctured, causing great loss of blood and shock to the system. Had known the prisoner for many years. His manner was peculiar, but his conversation rational.

To Mr. Dugdale—I attribute his peculiarity to deafness. He was sane enough on every subject I ever conversed with him upon.

This concludes the case fur the Crown, and Mr. Buszard called the following witnesses, previous to making his speech.

Mr. J. Mills Anderson, governor of the County Gaol, said he had had frequent opportunities of observing the prisoner since he had been in the prison. His general conduct was that of a very eccentric man, but he was pretty shrewd on some subjects. He knew what he had done, but he justified his act by pointing to several passages in the Bible relative to the subject of witches. On one occasion witness saw him in his cell, when he said that he could convince him of the truth of witchcraft if he had an opportunity of doing so. Witness replied "Very well; what do you want?" Prisoner said if he were supplied with a jug and a small file, and witness would see him in the morning, then he would prove that he was bewitched. Witness supplied him with these things, and saw him in the morning. The prisoner then held up a small glass bottle of water, half full, and, pointing to an air bubble which was floating on the surface of the water, said that was proof that he was bewitched. Witness understood prisoner to say that he had been and consulted a "wise man" on this subject, and he had told him that he was possessed. Prisoner said that the deceased had met her eyes upon him, and it was only necessary for her to do that in order to bewitch him if she was wicked enough. Witches had power to possess people in that way. He said that he had never been well since the deceased had set her eyes upon him, and never been able to do a good day's work. He said it was his duty to kill the woman. He did not seem to regard what he had done required justification. At one time he said he should not have done it if he had not been in beer. He was aware that he stood in some peril, because a few days ago he offered to give witness a sovereign to get him off.

To Mr. Buszard— The passages in the Scriptures to which he referred for justification were the 8th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the 9th to the 11th verses; the 5th chapter of Micah, 12th and 13th verses; and the 27th verse of the 20th chapter of Leviticus.

In accordance with a suggestion made by the Judge, a Bible was procured and the following read:—"A man, also, or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stone; their blood shall be upon them."— Leviticus xx., and 27th verse.

The Judge—Did he seem to consider there were passages in the Bible which warranted anybody in doing what he had done?

Witness—That was my impression.

Dr. Parsey, superintendent of the County Lunatic Asylum, said he had had two interviews with the prisoner. He wee a man of generally feeble character and badly developed head, which, in conjunction with congenital deafness and impediment of speech, marked him as a man of very weak intellect. He took a childish interest in the most trifling matters, and was most demonstrative. He was labouring under a strong delusion on the subject of witchcraft, and had applied the subject to his own case with such intensity of purpose that he was not responsible for what he did in connection with that subject. Witness did not give a certificate for his removal to the lunatic asylum because he had not been tried, and if he once entered a lunatic asylum the case was so confirmed he would never come out again. Witness, therefore, thought it was best he should take his trial first.

Mr. Munn, surgeon at the County Gaol, confirmed the evidence of the previous witnesses.

The jury acquitted the prisoner on the ground of insanity, and he was ordered to be kept in custody during her Majesty's pleasure.



TO DO

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000790/18670104/058/0004
Tipperary Free Press - Friday 04 January 1867

TO DO

THE RECLUSE OF EVERTON,

(From the Liverpool Daily Vott.

There have always been men and even women who have found charms in solitude. In the olden time these misanthropists sought loneliness eastern deserts,; and became the heroes and heroines of many saintly legend and even in our own days their number is so great that Catholicism, which finds form (or every phase of human feeling, provides holy lives for all who wish to live out of the world. Pious practices, however, do not occupy all the solitaries. Every now and then newspaper readers are startled the discovery of hidden lives of hermits who have been living unknown in our midst—alone among millions. Sometimes deal h reveals the hidden life, and sometimes a fortuitous accident or the curiosity of friends and neighbours. To this latter we owe the knowledge that this busy town of ours affords a hiding-place for one of those unsaintly recluses who seek not the inspiration of holiness to utilise the loneliness of their lives. In a populous neighbourhood not an hour's walk from the famous toffee shop, and exactly on that line of demarcation which divides the borough of Liverpool from the township of Everton, stands house which for years past has been remarkable to passers by. Surrounded by other booses, whose decent habitation denoted the brightness and the cleanliness ol their outward seeming, its dilapidated appearance heightens the contrast. What it may be inside few can tell, for daring the last quarter century few, indeed, have been permitted to cross its threshold but outside the tokens of its antiquity are palpable enough, Windows it has none, for where the light once shone through the window panes, the sun's rays are excluded by thick boarding, which seems be rotting away from very age and exposure to the weather. Where the painter once exercised his art the result of his lobour is obliterated the dost of years and generally the strange edifice presents the air of tumble down dilapidation which is supposed to characterise deserted domiciles, or property Chancery going to rain according to law. That it is either would be the general supposition, hot for a faint wreath of smoke ascending from the chimney—the solitary sign that there really human habitation. The ascending smoke pnaxles the passers-by, and many are the enquiries consequently received by the ininhabitants of neighbouring houses as to the apparently strange phenomenon. The little ehUdren have faith of their own that the , house is habitated hobgoblins, and speak of its mistress a witch. Older children say the bouse is haunted, and have legends of a certain visitant ol the other world, who walks the night unseen, but no means unheard; but the more intelligent neighbours answer with an ominous nod the head and the information that the house is inhabited by a lady of independent means." This is literally the foot. For a Quarter of a century lady had secreted herself from worldly ken in this dilapidated house. Strange say, daring that long period not even the oldest inhabitant has seen her face in daylight. How she subsists, what are her domestic habits, no one can tell. All that is known is she lives there alone. Sometimes—once a week, it is said— when the shades of hare fallen, she steals from her hermitage provide herself with the necessaries of life for the coming week, and collect the rents of some oontignous hoaxes, on which she subsists. The children treat her with awe, and scamper from her path during these weekly outgoings, and sll her neiirhlwurs look on her with wondering eye. The lair recluse is elderly now, and grey —perhaps more with cure and the burden of l»er isolated life than with years—and looks like figure from old picture. Pale, and with lectures sharpened aseetism, her free has relic of beauty about it, which tells of loveliness faded away, and her figure, yet unbent, has grace and delicacy which bespeak gentle breeding. Her attire, natural one who has used so long out of the world, is ancient its fashion. Of modern innovations she knew nothing: the raddle back bonnet only represents by kerchief worn gipsy fashion, and crinoline is only conspicuous by its absence. She speaks only to her tradesmen and her tenants, and her language is remarkable for its brevity. Of herself she never speaks, and none of those who have weekly dealings with her have ever heard her inquire of the 'tilings of this world. Various the theories indulged in as to her domestic habits. certain hour every night faint glimmering of light comes through the crevices of the boarding of each window in succession; and these glimmerings one time formed the foundation for certain fantastic tales of withery, until it was discovered to the recluse's habit to search all her rooms before retiring to rest. On one of these occasions her career eras nearly ended. The next morning her neighbours remarked the of the usual stream of smoke from the chimney; and oni of her tenants, fancying her eccentric land lady was really out of the world, entered the house and found toe poor landlady lying senseless at the foot the stain, where she had lain since the preceding night, having fallen down stairs on her nightly rounds. Strange and varied are the stories circulated among the old women of the neighbourhood account for the unnatnral life of the recluse, the true history of the lady is more strange, and has spice of romance about it which might afford scope for the novelist's art. Some thirty three years ago the recluse was a young and beautiful girl of 18 years, and, as is the custom of young and beautiful girls of that age, thought proper to fell in love. The object of her affection was a young man of delicate health and exceedingly moderate means, hot dowered with mental qualifications which, to the lady at least, oompeoaatrd for lack of more material attractions. She evidently never told her love hot in evil boor her parents discovered it, and ruthlessly pat an end to any chance of Ha coarse being smooth by the peremptory separation of the loven. In few years the lover was forgotten, and the lady became engaged, and was finally married to a rich tradesman who was once well known in the neighbourhood Bond-street. The wedding was as ■iguifieit m ample nans could make it,



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004723/18671219/037/0003
Devizes and Wilts Advertiser - Thursday 19 December 1867

*Appeared widely under the same title.*

THE DEVONSHIRE WITCHES.

At the Plymouth Guildhall on Friday, Mary Catherine Murray was brought up, on remand, charged, under a warrant, with having used certain subtle means and devices to impose on one Thomas Rendle. From further evidence and cross-examination it appeared that when the prosecutor first consulted the prisoner he was told by her that if she did not cure his wife, who is paralysed, she would return all moneys that might be paid for herbs and services. He had paid in all £4 10s., and submitted that his wife had not been benefited in the least, but had, on the contrary, as he believed, been "ill-wished" by the prisoner. With a view to a cure of this "ill-wished" he had consulted a "white witch" in the person of a man named Gribble, of Plymouth, who had undertaken, like the prisoner, to cure the patient or refund all payments; to this "witch" he had already paid some money. Inspector Murch stated that when he apprehended Murray he read the warrant to her, and she replied that she had a right to charge for her medicine. He produced the "charm" which the prisoner sent to Rendle, and which consisted of a piece of parchment, on which were signs, and against them were such remarks "Whosoever beareth this sign all spirits will do him homage." "This sign against witchcraft, putrid infection, and sudden death," "Whosoever beareth this sign need fear no foe," and "This is a sign against witchcraft and suicide, and against evil demons." He also produced another "charm" of a similar nature, which was worn by the prisoner when she was taken into custody. Mr. Brian, on behalf of Murray, while deploring the nonsense, ignorance, and superstition which had been revealed, contended that no offence had been committed against the law; the prosecutor was as big a fool as the prisoner. The Bench sentenced the prisoner to three months' imprisonment with hard labour. Murray was then charged with having imposed on one Grace Brimblecome, from whom she had received 10s.; but the hearing of the case was postponed.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004565/18610204/027/0003
Magnet (London) - Monday 04 February 1861

A WITCH IN THE  NINETEENTH CENTURY.

A little and dirty-looking gipsy woman, who gave the rather singular name of Reservoir Ayres, and who carried an infant in her arms, was charged. at Hammersmith Court, with obtaining money and clothes from two servant girls under the pretence of being able to tell their Fortunes—Sarah Healey, a simple-looking young girl stated that she was in service at Kensal-green. The prisoner came to the house with meat skewers for sale, and said that she could tell her fortune. Witness asked her what she charged, and she stated that she told fortune's for sixpence and a shilling, but that she could tell it better for a shilling. She accordingly gave her a shilling, and she told her that she would leave the house in two months, sad be married before six months (laughter), to a dark man. After she told me my fortune she said she wanted a half-crown more. I gave it her. On the Monday following she came for a sovereign more, either in money or in clothes. I gave a dress and a shawl. She said she had not charged sufficient; that her mother-in-law would come and kick up a row. She went away after I had given her the shawl and dress. She came again on Saturday and wanted more money. I had no money, and I went and told my mistress. She sent for a constable, and gave her into custody. Three weeks ago the prisoner sent another woman for some more clothes.—Mary Ann Richmond said: I live with the last witness. The prisoner told me my fortune. I was to leave in a short time, and be married within six months. I paid her 1s, and afterwards 2s 6d more. On the Monday I gave her two petticoats, two chemises, and two pair of stockings. I was afraid of her mother-in-law coming and making a noise.—The prisoner said she went to sell some meatstands, and they gave her in charge for another person.— Mr. Ingham told her that she had cheated the poor young fools of their money and clothes upon the supposition that she could give them husbands in six months.— The constable here intimated an omission in their evidence, upon which the first witness, Healey, was re-called. She stated that when the prisoner came the second time she wanted £2 at first, and when she told she had not got it, she said if she did not take home money or clothes her mother in-law, who was an old witch, would bewitch them (laughter).—Mr. Ingham sentenced her to thee months' hard labour.
