# Felo de Se — Abel Griffiths

Last *felo de se* to be buried at a crossroads... But it wasn't quite that simple...


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18230624/016/0003
Morning Post - Tuesday 24 June 1823

MOST HORRIBLE OCCURRENCE. CORONER'S INQUEST on a GENTLEMAN and his SON.

Yesterday evening an Inquest was held al the sign of the Green Dragon, Maddox-street, Hanover-square, before Thos. Higgs, Esq. Coroner, on the bodies of Thos. Howard Griffiths, Esq., aged 60, and Abel Griffiths, his son, aged 22, who came by their death, under the following dreadful circumstances:—

The Jury being sworn, proceeded to take a view of tbe bodies, which lay at their house, No. 4, Maddox-street. The bodies of the deceased lay in the drawing-roam, and presented a most awful spectacle; the floor of the apartment was covered with blood; the father lay prostrate on his back in one corner of the room, and the son was laying about seven yards from him; they resembled each other very much, and the greatest interest was excited on the occasion.

On the return of the Jury to the Green Dragon, Mr. Hunter Nicholson, Assistant to Mr. King, of Conduit-street, Surgeon, being sworn, said that he was sent at half-past twelve o'clock yesterday at noon. A Gentleman called in great haste, saying that a Gentleman had shot himself. He went immediately and arrived at the house five minutes after tbe circumstance had taken place. Witness was shown into the drawing-room on the first floor, where he found the two bodies — one near the door, and the other near the fire-place. The father was dead, but the son was not quite so, but insensible. He died in five minutes after his arrival. Both of the deceased had their clothes on. On examining the head of the elder deceased, he found a wound proceeding from a pistol-ball, and a large quantity of blood had flowed therefrom; and witness had no doubt but this caused his death. There were no other marks of violence on his person. Tbe body af the deceased Mr. Griffiths, jun., lay near tbe fire-place; he found a wound on the right temple, evidently from a pistol ball, which had entered the brain. The brains of the deceased were scattered about the carpet. There were two small pistols in the room, one on tbe table and the other on the floor. There was a discolouration on the fore finger of the right hand of Mr. Griffiths, jun. which causes witness to believe no fired off the pistols. The hands of the elder deceased were perfectly clean. He had hia gloves on, and his umbrella and hat laid close by him, as if he was on the point of leaving tbe roam when shot.

Dr. J. Heaviside sworn, corroborated the testimony of the above witness.

William Wade, a man of colour, being sworn, said that he was servant to the deceased Mr. Griffiths, sen. whose son occasionally visited the house. His family resides at Southampton; he called five or six times lately at the house. No. 4, in Maddox-street, Hanover-square, where his father lodged when in town. The deceased, Mr. Abel Griffith., waa studying for the law, and resided ia Temple-lane. His father did not usually see him when he made his visits; be did not see him in two visits he made; when he first called his father was not at home. He saw him the third time he called; witness on opening the door went up stairs aad informed the father that his son was below. He gave orders for him to walk up stairs.

Question.— Had you any reason to believe they were not on friendly terms?

Witness— Yes; the father has often told me to deny him when his son called; on one occasion when he called, he requested to have an interview with his father, and on witness answering him, he was requested to walk up to the drawing room, but witness could not tell what happened between them; the last time be called was yesterday noon about half-past 12 o'clock when witness was up stairs. He waa informed by a boy in the house that a young Gentleman was below, who was desirous of seeing him, witness's master; witness went down stairs, and saw Mr. Abel Griffiths standing in the passage. He had his arms folded, and appeared melancholy and dejected. He said he wanted to see his father, and asked if he waa at home? Witness answered "that he was;" on which the deceased asked "might he go up stairs?" Witness said "No," he would go, and he accordingly proceeded up stairs, and informed the father, who consented to see him. Witness conducted him into the drawing room, on which he bowed to his father, who returned it. The father was going out at the time, and had previously announced his intention of doing so to witness. They remained in the room about 20 minutes; they at first spoke very low. Witness heard the father say to his son, that "he knew very well what would be the end of it." He also said, "I allowed you a certain sum of money, and that would have kept you very well; you ought to have staid where you were." He did not hear the deceased repeat the specified sum which he allowed him, nor did he know where his father wished him to have remained. Witness also beard the father say to his son, "I must go out."

Coroner— Did you hear the son threaten him?— A. I did not.

Juryman— Were there ever any letters received at the house from the deceased youth ?— Witness could only speak to one, the contents of which he knew nothing about. His master appeared vexed with his son while in the room. They had not been there long, when witness heard the report of a pistol. He went to ascertain the cause, and a Lady of the house was near the door; they shortly after heard the report of a second pistol; and, on opening the door, they saw the old Gentleman laying on the floor, aad bleeding very much.

Do you think your Master was shot by his son, the deceased?— A. I suspect so.

A Gentleman here suggested that evidence ought to be produced relative to the son's state of mind. He had chambers at Mr. Seward's, No. 5, Temple-lane, who, no doubt, could give evidence to that effect. The eldest deceased was a Planter in Barbadoes.

Mary Knight, who lived in the same house, corroborated the above, especially that part allusive to the deceased's lowness of spirits. Had no suspicion that any bodv else committed the acts.

Sarah Goald, servant to the deceased, Mr. Griffiths, sen. also corroborated the testimony given above.

The Coroner, in order to give time for the production of further evidence, adjourned Ihe Inquest until four o'clock to-day.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003018/18230627/021/0004
New Globe - Friday 27 June 1823

INTERMENT OF ABEL GRIFFITHS. The remains of this unfortunate parricide were car ried on Wednesday evening, in a shell, from the house of his father, in Maddx street, to St. Georges work-house, from whence they were conveyed at half-past one o'clock yesterday morning down South Audley-street, Hyde-park Corner, and Grosvenor-place, to the grave, at the cross-roads formed by Eaton-Street, King's-road, Grosvenor-place, and Pimlico. the arrival of the body on the ground, the constables formed a circle round the grave to keep off the crowd, the deceased body was then taken out, wrapped in a large piece of Russian matting, tied with a strong cord, and instantly dropped into the ground, or hole, about five feet in depth. The disgusting ceremony of driving a stake through the body was dispensed with. The number of persons who attended the body to the grave, including the constables and watchmen, amounted to about 200.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002762/18230629/020/0005
Wooler's British Gazette - Sunday 29 June 1823

HORRIBLE CASE. Monday evening an inquest was held, an the bodies of Thomas Howard Griffiths; Esq., aged sixty, and Abel Griffiths, his son, aged twenty-two, who came by their deaths under the following circumstances:— William Wade, said he was servant to the deceased, Mr. Griffith, sen., whose son occasionally visited the house. Mr. Abel Griffith, was studying for the law, and resided in Temple-lane; his father did not usually see him when he made his visits.— The last time he called, witness was up stairs. He was informed that a young gentleman was below, who was desirous of seeing his (witness's) master. Witness went down stairs, and saw Mr. Abel Griffiths standing in the passage. He had his arms folded, and appeared melancholy and dejected. He said he wanted to see his father, and asked if he was at home; witness answered "that he was," on which the deceased asked, "might he go up stairs?" Witness said "no:" he would go, and he accordingly proceeded up stairs, and informed the father who consented to see him. Witness conducted him into the drawing room, on which he bowed to his father who returned it. The father, was going out at the time, and had previously announced his intention of doing so to witness. They remained in the room about twenty minutes; they at first spoke very low: witness heard the father say to his son, "That he knew very well what would be the end of it; he (the son) would not feel satisfied, until a gaol had picked him up." He also said, "I allowed you a certain sum of money, and that would have kept you very well. You ought to have stayed where you was."— He did not hear the deceased repeat the specified sum which he allowed him—nor did he know where his father wished him to have remained. Witness also heard the father say to his son, "I must go out." They had not been there long when witness heard the report of a pistol. He went to ascertain the cause, a lady of the house was near the door; they shortly after heard the report of a second pistol, and on opening the door they saw the old gentleman lying on the floor, and bleeding very mach. The Coroner, adjourned the inquest until Tuesday; when the inquiry was resumed, and various witnesses examined; when it appeared certain that the son had murdered the father, and then destroyed himself. An attempt was made to shew that he was insane; but the only evidence to prove this, was that he was particularly irritable, and laboured under ill health, and pecuniary embarrassments.

After a consultation of nearly two hours, the jury returned the following verdict:— "Wilful murder of Thomas Howard Griffiths, by the said Abel Griffith, who afterwards killed himself in a sound state of mind." The friends of the deceased expected a verdict of insanity; and a young gentleman asked a juryman what the verdict really was? He answered, they had returned a verdict, "that the man was in a sound state of mind." "That's your opinion of evidence," retorted the young gentleman: and vociferated, "Shame! shame." The Coroner delivered his warrant to the beadle for the interment of the body of Mr. Abel Griffiths in a crossroad.

The body of Mr. Abel Griffiths was accordingly interred in the cross road, formed by Grosvenor-place; Eton-street, and the King's road, on Thursday morning. A crowd attended, and seemed much disgusted with a ceremony, which, however, was never more justified.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001131/18230705/039/0004
Galway Weekly Advertiser - Saturday 05 July 1823

DREADFFUL PARRICIDE.  
*London, June 24, 1823.*

Yesterday, about one o'clock, an affair of a most dreadful nature occurred at the house of Mr. Wynn, Maddox-street, Bond-street, where for a considerable time past, Thomas Grant Griffiths, Esq. and his family, have occupied lodgings. His son, Mr. Abel Griffiths, was frequently spoken to by his father respecting his expensive mode of living, and domestic feuds arose, which, it is supposed, led to the horrible event. Mr. Griffiths, sen. was yesterday morning observed rather depressed; he had inquired more than once for his son, who, soon after twelve o'clock, came in, and directly went to his father in the drawing-room. A violent altercation between them was heard, and after a slight pause, the inmates of the house were dreadfully alarmed on hearing the report of fire arms. The servants rushed up stairs, and on bursting into the room, were horror struck at seeing father and son stretched weltering in their blood.

An Inquest was held at the Green Dragon, Maddox street, before Thomas Higgs, Esq. on the bodies of the above unfortunate Gentlemen.

The Jury viewed the bodies, which presented a most shocking spectacle. The body of Thomas Grant Griffiths, Esq. the father, who appeared to be sixty years of age, lay extended near the door. The younger Griffiths seemed to be about the age of twenty-two; his body lay extended on the floor, near_the fire-place; the fore finger of the right hand was completely black, as if scorched from the flash of a pistol. The room was an entire stream of blood, and a universal thrill of horror ran through the Jury on beholding this horrid spectacle of father and son deprived of existence in this melancholy manner.

Mr. Nicholas, of St George's, Apothecary, being sworn, deposed that he was called about half past twelve o'clock yesterday afternoon, being informed that a Gentleman had shot himself. He went, and on being shown into the drawing room, he found two bodies, one near the door, the other near the fire place; the father was quite dead, the younger deceased expired five minutes after the Witness came into the room; they both had their clothes on; he examined the head of the father, found a wound on the temple—the left; it was a bullet wound, and, of course, caused his death; the youungest had also a wound on his right temple—a bullet wound; there were two pistols on the table of the room, which had the appearance of being recently dischaaged; the elder deceased had his gloves on; the fore finger on the right hand of the young man was discoloured; he had no doubt it was him who discharged the pistols; a large quantity of blood and brains were scattered about; there were no other wounds on either of the deceased; the young man lived a few minutes.

Coroner— Have you any doubts who fired the pistols? Not the slightest; the young man must have fired the pistols; they were very small and rifled.

Mr. Heaviside, the eminent Surgeon, corroborated this.

William Wade, a man of colour, being sworn, said, that he was servant to the deceased, Mr. Griffiths, sen., whose son occasionally visited the house. His family reside at Southampton. He called five or six times lately at the house, No. 4, in Maddox-street, Hanover-square, where his father lodged when in town. The deceased, Mr Abel Griffiths, was studying for the Law, and resided in Temple-lane. His father did not usually see him when he made his visits. He did not see him the two visits he made; when he first called, his father was not at home. He saw him the third time he called; Witness, on opening the door, went up stairs, and informed the father that his son was below. He gave orders for him to walk up stairs. They were not on friendly terms. The deceased is not an only son. There are brothers, and his mother is living. The fourth call the deceased son made, he left his card for his father, and left the place. He called again on Saturday last.

Question— had you any reason to believe they were not on friendly terms?

Witness— Yes; the father had told me to deny him when his son called. On one occasion when he called, he requested to have an interview with his father, and on Witness announcing him, he was requested to walk up to the drawing-room, but Witness could not tell what transpired between them. The last time he called was yesterday noon, about half-past twelve o'clock, when Witness was up stairs. He was informed by a boy in the house that a Young Gentleman was below who was desirous of seeing his (Witness's) master; Witness went down stairs, and saw Mr. Abel Griffiths standing in the passage; he had his arms folded, and appeared melancholy and dejected. He said he wanted to see his father, and asked if he was at home? Witness answered "that he was;" on which the deceased asked, "might he go up stairs?" Witness said, "No." He would go; and he accordingly went up stairs and informed the father, who consented to see him. Witness conducted him into the drawing-room, on which he bowed to his father, who returned it. The father was going out at the time and had previously announced his intention of doing so to Witness. They remained in the room about twenty minutes; they at first spoke very low. Witness heard the father say to his son, "that he knew very well that would be the end of it—he (the son) would not feel satisfied until a gaol had picked him up." He also said, "I allowed you a certain sum of money, and that would have kept you very well; you ought to have stayed where you was." He did not hear the deceased repeat the specified sum he allowed him, nor did he know where his father wished him to have remained. Witness also heard the father say to his son, "I must go out."

Coroner— Did you hear the son threaten him?—I did not.

Juryman— Were there ever any letters received at the house from the son?

Witness could only speak to one, the contents of which he knew nothing about. His master appeared vexed with his son while in the room. They had not been there long when Witness heard the report of a pistol; he went to ascertain the cause, and a lady of the house was near the door. They shortly after heard the report of a second pistol, and on opening the door they saw the old gentleman lying on the floor, and bleeding very much.

Do you think your master was shot by his son, the deceased?—I suspect so.

A Gentleman here suggested that evidence should be produced relative to the son's state of mind. He had chambers at Mr. Seward's, No. 8, Temple-lane, who no doubt could give evidence to that effect. The eldest deceased was a planter at Barbadoes.

Mary Knight, who lived in the same house, corroborated the above, especially that part alluding to the deceased's lowness of spirits; had no suspicion that any body else committed the act.

Sarah Gould, servant to the deceased, Mr. Griffiths, sen., also corroborated the testimony given above.

The Coroner, in order to give time for the production of further evidence, adjourned the evidence.

Additional Particulars.

This morning, the bodies of Messrs. Griffiths, sen. and jun. were placed in separate shells, a view of them having been previously taken by the Coroner and Jury. It was ascertained, by anatomical inspection, that the brains of both gentlemen had been penetrated by the bullets, and, of course, their deaths were instantaneous. Mr. Griffiths, sen. held a lucrative situation at Barbadoes, and possessed a valuable estate there, from which place he came to England a short time ago. The son, who had received a liberal education, was student in the Temple, and was allowed a very handsome sum by his father to support himself, but his father's allowance was not sufficient to defray the expenses which he had become liable to, from his extravagant expenditure, and recently he had been threatened with arrest. His father, who had frequently relieved his embarrassments, now determined to hold his hand; the son's fear of a gaol, it is said, drove him distracted.

Mr. Griffiths, sen. was about to leave his lodgings to pay a visit to a friend at the time he was destroyed by the hand of his son; he had his umbrella in his hand, and his gloves (white kid) on, when he fell. The fingers of his right hand glove were not soiled, which would have been the case, had he fired a pistol, and the handles of the pistols both lay towards the son, showing that the son must have fired both pistols. The son's fore finger of the right hand was crooked, and scorched with powder, when he was found by the servants. The quarrel between them was in consequence of the father refusing to pay the son's debts. The latter has for some time led a life of dissipation and extravagance, and it is to be hoped that he was not in "an accountable state of mind" when the parricidal deed was perpetrated.

At the adjourned Inquest the Jury, after consulting two hours, returned a verdict of "Wilful Murder of Thomas Howard Griffiths by the said Abel Griffiths, who afterwards killed himself in a state of sound mind."

The Coroner delivered his warrant to the Beadle for the interment of the body of Mr. Abel Griffiths, in a cross road.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18230702/025/0003
Morning Post - Wednesday 02 July 1823

*The BODY of the late PARICIDE and SUICIDE.*

Bow-street.— About six o'clock yesterday morning a hackney-coach drove up to the door of this Office, and the driver informed one of the patrol who was on duty, that he had in his coach the body of Mr. *Abel Griffiths*, who, it will be recollected, terminated his existence by blowing his brains out, after having shot his own father, and was in consequence of a verdict of *Felo de se*, returned by the Inquest on the occasion, ordered to be buried in the cross road, which order was duly executed.

The coachman stated, that in the middle of the night he was called off his stand in Oxford-street by a gentleman, who desired him to drive up that street, in which he twice stopped to take up two other gentlemen, and after some delay waa ordered to drive to Grosvenor-place, at the end of which he was ordered to stop, when all the three persons got out of the coach and went to the spot where Mr. Griffiths was buried, having ordered him to wait for them. After observing them for some time busily engaged about the spot, he perceived that they were digging, and then he began to suspect what their object was: they were employed for a considerable time, but, af last they came towards the coach, and he saw that they were carrying a dead body, which they put into the coach, and got in themselves afterwards, and then directed him to drive towards Foley-street, Marylebone; but before he drove off they folded sheets of paper round the plates of the coach so as to prevent the numbers from being seen. On arriving at Foley-street the three persons again got out of the coach, and told him to remain, as they would return in two or three minutes, aad then went up Foley-street, leaving the body in the coach. He waited for about five minutes and finding that they did not return, he began to feel alarmed and thinking that he might get into trouble through the affair, jumped upon his box, and drove as hard as he could to the office.

The patrole directed the coachman to attend at the Office at eleven o clock yesterday, and in the interim to convey the body to St. Martin's Bone-house, where we are informed the Coachman did take it, but it was refused to be received there, as it had been taken from the parish of St. George, Hanover-square, and we ascertained that it was ultimately deposited in the bonehouse of that parish.

The coachman did not attend in the course of yesterday nor was any further steps taken in the business, but as the body is safely detained, there is no doubt a proper inquiry will be instituted.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000103/18230703/003/0002
Exeter Flying Post - Thursday 03 July 1823

*CORONER'S INQUEST on the bodies of MR. THOS HOWARD GRIFFITHS and MR. ABEL GRIFFITHS, his son.* The Jury re-assembled on Tuesday afternoon for a further investigation of this horrible occurrence, which we noticed in out last, when three surgeons, who had occasionally attended Mr Griffiths, jun: stated that he was subject to violent headaches, and was very nervous and irritable. One Surgeon sais he believed that any distress of mind, added to the infirmity which distressed him, would drive him mad.— After a consultation of nearly two hours, the jury returned the following verdict: "Wilful murder of Thos. Howard Griffiths by the said Abel Griffiths, who afterwards killed himself in a sound state of mind."— The coroner accordingly delivered his warrant to the beadle; for the interment of the body of Mr. Abel Griffiths in a crossroad. On Wednesday morning the body of the unfortunate parricide was conveyed for interment to the cross=road formed by Eaton street, Grosvenor-place, and the King's road. The body was carried in a shell; it had on a winding sheet, drawers, and stockings, and a quantity of blood was clodded about the head, and the lining of the shell entirely stained. The body was wrapped in a large piece of Russian matting, tied round with some cord, and then instantly dropped into the hole, which was about five feet in depth; it was then immediately filled up, nd it was gratifying to see that that disgusting part of the ceremony of throwing lime over the body, and driving a stake through it, was on this occasion dispensed with.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000360/18230703/016/0004
Devizes and Wiltshire Gazette - Thursday 03 July 1823

The warrant for the interment (in a cross road) of the unfortunate parricide, Mr. Abel Griffiths, was executed on Wednesday last. The body was wrapped in piece of matting, and carried to the cross road formed by Eaton street, Grosvenor place, and the King's road; it was there dropped into a hole dug on purpose and obstruction whatever was offered by the surrounding multitude.— The ceremony of driving a stake through the body was dispensed with. The elder Mr. Griffith, it is said, filled the situation of Speaker of the Assembly in the Island of Barbadoes for several years, and had been formerly a Colonel of a militia regiment; he had not for many years back, resided with his family, in consequence, it is said, of some domestic difference.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002357/18230702/011/0003
New Times (London) - Wednesday 02 July 1823

Also in e.g. Morning Advertiser - Wednesday 02 July 1823

EXTRAORDINARY AFFAIR.—BOW-STREET.-It is the practice of this establishment for two of the patrol in rotation to remain all night at the office, in order that assistance may be the more easily obtained by those who may have occasion to employ the Police on a sudden emergency. Yesterday morning about six o'clock Smith, one of the patrol on the nightly watch, was called to the door by a loud knocking, and found the applicant for admission to be a hackney coachman, whose coach was standing at the door. The horses were very warm. and the coachman seemed terribly agitated. He said he had got the dead body of Mr. Abel Griffiths, the wretched young man who shot his father and himself a few days ago, in his coach, and he wanted to know what was to be done with it. Smith questioned him as to how it came there, and he said that "in the middle of the night" he was called from a stand in Oxford-street by a respectable looking man who ordered him to drive gently towards St. Giles's. He had not proceeded far before he was stopped, and another man got in, and further down a third entered the coach, and he was then ordered to drive to the end of Eaton-street, Pimlico, as fast as possible. When he arrived there they got out and "went to work," and dug up the body that was buried there. They covered in the ground, placed the body in the coach, and having covered his plates with paper to prevent the number from being seen, they ordered him to drive to Foley-place. He did so, and in Foley-place they got out, and having desired him to wait a few moments, walked away down another street or mews. He waited about five minutes, when finding they did not return he began to be alarmed at the probable consequences to himself of being found in the sole possession of a dead body, and determined to drive straight to Bow-street, and there deliver it to the police, or take their directions as to its disposal. Smith, on hearing this story, looked into the coach, and there saw a dead body wrapped in a piece of matting, exactly in the manner described in the newspapers, in the account given of the interment of Mr. Abel Griffiths. A crowd had by this time collected, and Smith told the coachman to drive to St. Martin's Workhouse, and deliver the body there, but did not accompany him. We learnt on inquiry at the workhouse, that the coachman came there with the body, and desired that it might be taken in, but the door-keeper having ascertained from the coachman whence it was taken, said, he had no power to take in the body, it having been interred in the parish of St. George, Hanover-square. He advised the coachman to take it to the workhouse in Mount street, Grosvenor-square, and he drove away avowedly for that purpose, and we were informed that the body was eventually deposited there.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001427/18230703/015/0002
Morning Advertiser - Thursday 03 July 1823

In the course of Tuesday evening some Gentlemen, supposed to be the friends of the late Mr. Abel Griffiths, called at Mount-street Workhouse to see the body, and afterwards had an interview with the Committee for managing the workhouse, when it was determined to have the body buried in the burial-ground for the parish poor. A coffin was provided for it, by the parish, and it was carried to the grave upon a bier by four of the paupers, in the usual manner; but no watchmen, constables, or others, were present; and the body, which had been so exposed and carried about from place to place, was at last consigned to the mother earth, where, it is hoped, it will now be permitted to remain undisturbed.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003113/18230706/028/0007
Sunday News - Sunday 06 July 1823

MR. ABEL GRIFFITHS.

The case excited great interest among the merchants concerned in the tallow-trade, who crowded the Court during the trial.

On Tuesday morning, between five and six o'clock, a hackney coach drove up to Bow-street Office, and told the patrol in waiting, that he had the corpse of young Mr. Griffiths in his coach. The driver said he was called from the stand in Oxford-street, in the dead of the night, by a man who, on getting into his coach, told him to drive gently towards Hyde Park. Before he had driven half way thither, another man got into the coach. They ordered him to drive on, down Park-lane, and just as they reached the corner, a third man, who appeared to have been waiting there by appointment, joined the other two. Having reached this spot, all three got out of the coach, and went away in the direction of Eaton-street, at the end of which the body had been buried, desiring him to wait their return. In about a quarter of an hour they returned laden with the corpse; and putting it into his coach, they told him to drive to Foley-place, when they all got out; and leaving the corpse in his coach, they again directed him to wait their return. They then went away, and the poor fellow becoming alarmed "for fear he should get into trouble," as he said, did not wait more than five minutes before he mounted his box, and drove off as fast as be could to this Office.

The patrol having heard his story, directed him to take the corpse to St. Martin's Workhouse. The porter, however, refused to take the corpse in, alleging, that as the coachman had received it in the parish of St. George, Hanover-square, he ought to take it to the Workhouse of that parish. The coachman was extremely anxious to avoid haying any thing further to do with it, but the porter peremptorily refusing to take the corpse, he again drove off with his horrible fare. The body was afterwards taken to the  Workhouse in Mount-street, Grosvenor-square. A Parochial Board was instantly summoned, and after remaining in consultation some time, the churchwardens waited on Mr. Peel, at the Secretary of State's' Office, and the result of the interview with the Hon. Secretary was not stated, but orders were given to place the deceased in a shell, which was accordingly done. And on Wednesday morning the body, by order of the Vestry, was again deposited quietly in the mounds of earth allotted in the church-yard for the graves of paupers; a few of whom, buried the body with as little noise and less notice than usually mark the funerals of the unfortunate inmates of the Workhouse. No ceremony was observed, nor was the sublime ritual of the Church read usually over the dead rehearsed; in fact the interment closely resembled that in the cross roads.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002647/18230714/028/0003
Statesman (London) - Monday 14 July 1823

INQUEST ON ABEL GRIFFITHS.

From circumstances which have recently come to our knowledge, we are led to think that, had due diligence been employed in collecting evidence respecting this revolting case, the public would have unanimously acquiesced in the verdict of the Coroner's Jury. On the Jury breaking up, the Coroner, it is stated, gave directions that the pistols, and any other property found on Abel Griffiths, should be taken in charge by the officers, as they became forfeited to the King. In this instance, there was no supineness in the exercise of official function; and had the pistols been examined, as carefully as they were assigned, a clue might have been obtained which would have led to the circumstances to which we have referred. The name of the maker was on the pistols. He is a well known and respectable gunsmith in Holborn; and, had he been examined at the Coroner's Inquest, must have explained the manner in which the perpetrator of the parricide and suicide obtained possession of the instruments by which the deeds were effected. On the Saturday before the dreadful catastrophe took place, it appears that a gentleman, with whom the gun-smith was acquainted, came into his shop, accompanied by another whom he did not know, but who, he afterwards learned, was Abel Griffiths. The latter, having assigned some plausible reason for his application, requested his companiqn to solicit the loan of a pair of pistols from Mr. P. The request was complied with; a pair of pistols, *on the percussion principle*, was handed to the applicant; and *the pistols were loaded in the shop*. On the Monday, immediately after the gentleman who had accompanied him to the shop had learned the deadly use to which they had been applied, he hastened breathless to the gun-smith, and communicated the horrid tidings. These parties, paralysed, we may suppose, by the thought of having unwittingly contributed to the complicated catastrophe, did not, like other acquaintance of the deceased, press voluntarily forward with their evidence at the Inquest; but, had the marks on the pistols been noticed, so as to have led the Coroner to have summoned the maker, the Jury would not only have learnt the important fact, that Abel Graliths had with deliberation and address, borrowed and loaded the deadly weapons, *two days before the accomplishment of his purpose*, but have also ascertained his appearance and manner at the moment he obtained possession of the means of effecting his object. Other witnesses, intimate friends of Abel Griffiths, had, in consequence of the adjournment of the Inquest an opportunity of attending; and they, it would seem, attended spontaneously. They, however, came forward to testify, only respecting the irritability of his mind, for some time previous to the perpetration of the deadly deeds; and though one of them was asked whether he had kept pistols, the Coroner and Jury were satisfied on hearing that the witness could not say whether he kept pistols, or how he came by them. It is strange that when a question was asked about the pistols, the weapons themselves were not examined and the clue, adverted to, pursued; but the enquiry, it appears, was no sooner started than relinquished.

These pistols, if the statement referred to above be correct, were ordered to be taken in charge by the officers, as having become forfeited to the King. This order must have been pronounced on the assumption that they were the property of Abel Griffiths: but if proved to have been lent, and to have been, *bona fide*, the property of the maker, ought they not to be returned to him?




https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001659/18230725/012/0002
Drakard's Stamford News - Friday 25 July 1823

TO DO

THE SPECULATOR.

No. 48.

At length the barbarous custom is abolished of running a stake through the corpse of a suicide, and throwing it into a hole on the public highway. The punishment also of the pillory has ceased to be numbered amongst our penal inflictions; and these two alterations of the old law of England are doubtless considered by those who are inclined to view with approbation every change whose apparent object is humanity ard mercy, as an amelioration of the ferocious and rigid system of cur ancestors, and an evident advancement in the path of civilization I am not inclined to deny the possibility that excessive and disgraceful punishment of all kinds may wholly fail in deterring from the crime on which it is inflicted; nor that, when vengeance is wreaked on the body of the dead, it is inefficacious in its purpose; nor that, when by any means the punishment intended by the law is aggravated beyond its legal and original design, measures should not be taken to restrict it within the original purpose, or if that cannot be done, then—as in the present case—to abolish it. But all these apparent improvements, though they may not be positively denied, may yet bear to be questioned; and speculation upon all subjects, thank God, is yet allowed us.

Wise as we are, I hope we do not deny that our ancestors who framed the laws of England, were guided by plain common sense, by experience, and by reasoning, in the construction of them, although they might not have attained to that degree of intellectual refinement and sensibility as their enlightened posterity. They plainly considered self-murder to be a crime of so atrocious a description as to merit a punishment equally severe and disgraceful. They were well aware, I think it may be conceded to them, that in inflicting this punishment on the dead body, they were not inflicting any personal suffering, which is a chief argument employed by us their philosophic descendants. You do not punish the dead body, says the profound reasoner of the 19th century, and therefore it is absurd so to treat it: you only cause pain to the survivors, who were totally innocent of the crime ; and this too, our unfortunate ancestors probably knew likewise. How, then, came they to be 50 absurd as to enact this law? They probably considered that the person who meditated suicide, might be deterred from his purpose by that very consideration which we esteem so futile, viz., the dread of bequeathing such a quantity of mental suffering to his friends and relations as would ensue from its execution; and they might likewise take into the account the mortal aversion that every human creature in a civilized country entertains to such indecent exposure and contemptuous treatment of his corpse. These two circumstances, they not very foolishly thought, might operate to diminish the fatal crime : and is it not the policy of all legislatures to proportion the punishment to the offence ? and even, when the offence still proceeds without diminution, to increase the severity of S:e punishment? But the philosophers of the present day have made a notable discovery, which was wholly unknown and unsuspected by our ancestors, that no person can be in his senses who commits the crime of suicide, and consequently is not either legally or morally responsible for his actions ; and this doctrine has been publicly avowed and acted on by divers coroners and juries in the exercise of their office. Whether it is assented to and sanctioned by our legislature, or not, certain it is, that by abrogating in all cases the ancient punishment of the law of England on this crime, they have afforded reason for our believing that such is their opinion, and thereby have made a total alteration in that branch of the jurisprudence of the country, and, let me add, likewise in the religious code, Bﬂ which it is distinctly ordained, that christian burial sh be denied to all those who have laid violent hands on themselves. Now, if it be decreed that every suicide is insensible of his own act, he is entitled to cxri.su'nn burial. How will our philosophers reconcile this inconsistency ? Formerly, too, the goods and chattels of the felo de se went to the crown. But this and all other consequences of this felony, are now annihilated. The suicide who either rashly or deliberately puts himself out of existence, may claim the decencies of christian interment as certainly as the good gentleman whe dies quietly in his bed, ani the parson will, with as serious a‘}aee, over the grave of one as well as the other, pronounce, that ¢ it as pleased Alm‘ishty God, of his great goodness, to fake to himself the soul of our dear brother (or sister) here departed ;' an expression at direct variance with the r:E:ic. The suicide, whether possessing his faculties or not, has, sué sponte, rushed out of the world: he has violated a'command both divine and human ; and then, God is said to have taken him toh??. himself! upon the paltry assumption that he was bereft of his senses. Why, upon this reasoning, the most atrocious crimes might stand excused. I believe, that the man who murders a kind father or mother, an affectionate female or sincere friend, must be out of his senses when he commits so foul a deed; but happily we are not arrived at that stage of refinement as to exempt the murderer from the punishment allotted to his crime, or to comprehend him in the saving statute of lunacy. Though no advocate for excessive severity of punishment, I am ﬁml‘y convinced, that if every person meditating suicide were fully assured in his own mind that all the terrible enactments of our ancient law would be executed on his person and pro erty, the crime would experience a considerable cge& ‘The philosophic nonsense of people not caring what became of their dead bodies, would be exploded ; the wholesome dread of afflicting their surviving friends and relatives would be encouraged ; the desire, so universal in a christian country, of being decently deposited with its accustomed rites and ceremonies, would predominate ; and, th‘;mgh lﬁst, not least, the lady or gentleman holding to her or his breast the dagger or pistol, or preparing the poisoned bowl, might be apt to recollect, fﬁ.ﬁheif entire property would pass to tge crown. If, after having an opportunity of giving due weight to these considerations ;nd the dissuasives of religion, they chuse to perpetrate the crime, our plain and simple progenitors sai«f, ¢ Why, then, you Snll pay the penalty." Be it observed, however, t.{nt they mnl{: an exception in favour of actual mental aberration : and thence, the institution of the coroner's inquest, which was to determine the sanity or insanity of the deceased. But now, it is determined that a// suicides are under mental aberration, and are consequently exempt from all the penalties that anciently attached to self-murder. 1 believe, that this recent act of parliamént was either produced or accelerated by the d‘:adful catastrophe of {oung Abel Griffiths, the parricide, whose case was related in tones of such sensibility by all our journals. This youth, it was said, discovered evident symptoms of a perturbed mind, and was described s a person of a high sense of honour and of most delicate feelings, and the jury were positively insulted in the coroner's court, and also in the newspapers, for bringing in a verdict, after hearing all the evidence, of self-murder. This young gentleman had ngerely, in consequence of a little aberration of mind, shot bis father and then himself ; and the jury were illiberal enough not to give his high sense of honour and nice feelings any -glane in directing their judgment; and, consequently, this parricide was buried in a public highway. But the imfigniﬁel sustained by his lifeless body (though the ceremony of the stake was omitted) were so revolting to the humanity and delicacy of those having authority, that, in breathless haste, out comes an act of the legislature prohibitil:gein future such terrible inflictions, and ordaining, that the bodies of all unfortunate suicides shall be ngeponted with due christian solemnity ! And yet this young gentleman, Mr. Abel Grifliths, went with a brace of loaded pistols to his father's lodgings, and therefore with a cool premeditated purpose of parricide and self-murder!

With respect to the pillory; exposure and disgrace were unquestionably the motives of‘ our forefathers for enacting that punishment, and very wholesome and merciful was it'as long as it was restrained to that purpose. I confess I do not see the wisdom of abolishing it, relieved as it was in modern times from the cruel accompaniments, which, either by legal sanction or connivance, attended it even to the beginning of the last century, when it was not uncustomary to nail the prisoners cars to the machine, or even to cut or tear them off, or s!it his nose! The punishment was now restricted to exposure ; and the pelting of the person, which, I presume, is the prineipal argument against the continuation of the practice, thight have been 'i:'glllv prohibited, and effectually restricted by the activity of the police. It appears from the other machine for penal exposure, the stocks, which may be called the humble brother of the pillory, inasmuch as it performs on the ground, and for ‘minor offences, and on the legs of the oé::der, what its superior executes aloft in gir, upon the head and hands, that disgrace for offences which were perhaps onl{l of a 'scandalous description, and therefore merited not the loss of life, limb, or property, was a favourite punishment with our ancestors. It was sufficient for such persons to be seen and known, in order to be avoided, and the institution of this penal mode appears equally wise and merciful. I have great reason for believing that the first notion that arose in the mind of the ministry on the subject of abolishing the pillory, was on occasion of sentencing Lord Cochrane to that punishment some years :go for being aiding and assisting what was then called the Stock Exchange Hoax ; when his lordship solemnly declared, that if that sentence were carried into execution, he would appear in a wig, gown, and band, the exact fac simile of the late Lori Ellenborough, who had tried the cause and pronounced the sentence, and of whose integrity in that and other matters, his lordship was known to entertain but a moderate opinion. This certainly was the first time that ever the operation of that punishment was suspended. Nobody could have hindered the noble lord from adopting whatever costume he pleased, particularly a wig; anﬁ public feeling at that time was in such a state as to render it extremelY desirable that no person resembling Lord EllenborougH should be presented to the public in that situation : not that Lord E,ochnne's person or feelings would have been in the least endangered ; but it was as well to avoid the scorn, derision, and ridicule, that through the representative would have been cast on the original. It is not meant to be denied, that many of the punishments enacted by our ancestors were dreadfully cruel, and highly disproportioned to any offence that could possibly have been committed. Oz these, the most brutal was the tearing out the entrails of the living victim convicted of high-treason, and burning them before his face. This was indeed a kingly punishment, that could have been devised by none but a tyrant tremblingly alive for the stability of his throne ; for no individual amongst the common ranks of mankind is capable of imagining such a diabolical punishment towards a fellow-creature. The peine forte et dure, t:{ which the culprit arraigned at tﬁt bar of justice and refusing to plead, was pressed with heavy weights, gradually increased upon his prostrate body, either till he answered, or till death relieved him from his sufferings, was also an instance of united savageness and ignorance, from which civilization has rescued us. These and all other such punishments were banished from England by the law which prohibited torture. Be 1t known, however, to all those who are advocating the unrestrained restoration of Ferdinand to the throne of Spain, and complaining of the cruelties which they say that cruel and perfidious being is suffering at the hnm(s of his subjects, that, when those subjects brought him back to his throne, which he had basely and pusillanimously surrendered to the power of Napoleon, the first thing he did was, after subverting the new order of things which they had established for him, to seize as many of them as he could catch, and press them with weights upon their stomachs till they died! Mina, the brave and heroic Mina, very narrowly escaped this compliment, his carriage and horses being seized on the road, and himself getting off by stratagem. Many of the principal men, who at the risque of their lives effected this royal revolution, and placed the object of their faithful and loyal idolatry on the throne of his ancestors, received this kind of death as the recompense of their fidelity. The rest, we know, expiated their high crime by fleeing in a state of banishment into foreign countries, or by wasting their lives in dungeons, under a total confiscation of their property, and by as much dishonour heaped upon their names and families as court influence could effect. 

Since this essay was begun, the long-expected 6th, 7th, and Bth cantos of *"Don Juan,"* by Lord Byron, have been published, and in the Emfnee appear observations so exactly in unison 'iﬁl‘) the l:«:ntimendta which I hg:; r tedly expressed on the subject, and especially wi tl?:?withy which these remarks were commenea{, that I cannot forbear transcribing them with no small degree of self-congratulation at their coincidence with those of so acute and intelligent a writer. Lord Byron's poetry is admirable, of an original and unprecedented description : his prose, in which he must necessarily assimilate himself to the level of ordinary writing, is in proportion keen and significant ; and it is delightful to observe, that this extraordinary man, who is born to all the honours and distinctions of aristocracy, yet is bound by no slavish attachment to his native class, but attacks its vices and follies with as free and bold a hand, as the most liberal democrat ; and that he likewise stands in awe of no persons, however sounding their names,—of no high places or offices, however dignified by the pride of birth, or the little brief authority of station. ¢ln the course of these cantos," says his lordship, ¢a stanza or two will be found relative to the late Mur%uis of Londonderry, but written some time before his decease. ‘ Had that person's oligarchy died with him, they would have been suppressed; as it is, I am aware of nothing in the manner of his death or of his life, to prevent the free expression of the opinions of all whom his whole existence was consumed in endeavouring to enslave.— That he was an amiable man in private life, may or may not be true ; but with this the public have nothing to do ; and as to lamenting his death, it will be time enough when Ireland has ceased to mourn for his birth. As a minister, I, for one of millions, looked upon him as the most despotic in intention and the weakest in intellect, that ever tyrannized over a country. It is the first time indeed since the Normans, that England has been insulted by a minister (at least) who could not speak English, and that parliament permitted itself to be dictated to in the language of Mrs. Malapro‘:. Of the manner of his death little need be said,except that if a poor radical, such as Waddington or Watson, had cut his throat, he would have been buried in a cross-road, with the usual appurtenances of the stake and mallet. But the minister was an elegant lunatic—a sentimental suicide—he merely cut the ¢ carotid artery' (blessings on their learninfh!) and lo! the pageant, and the abbey ! and "the :{e bles of dolour yelled forth" by the newspapers—and the harangue of the coroner in an eulogy over the bleeding body of the deceased—(an Anthony worthy of such a Cmsar)—and the nauseous and atrocious cant of a de| Ended crew of conspirators against all that is sincere or 'honourable. In his death he was necessarily one of two ‘ things by the law—a felon or a madman—and in either Case no great subject for panegyric. In his life he was }—what all the world knows, and half of it will feel for years to come, unless his death prove a '"moral lesson" to the surviving Sejani of Europe. It may at least serve as some consolation to the nations, that their oppressors are not happy, and in some instances judge so justly of their own actions as to anticipate the sentence of mankind.—Let us hear no more of this man, and let Ireland remove the ashes of her Grattan from the sanctuary of Westminster. Shall the Patriot of humanity repose by the Werther of politics!!!'

These spirited sentiments have,as might have been supposed, aroused the whole Castlereagh party, and the entire ministerial phalanx of the present day, their agents, dependants, whippers-in, and public cryers—with one *illustrious exception*—even to madness. The immediate and even ready instrument of their vengeance, the weekly journal, which even to name in decent columns is now become infamous, raves and howls even to madness. Lord B.'s poignant remarks have stung them to the quick, and it is fervently hoped that the illustrious exception above alluded to may fulfil his lordship's patriotic anticipations, by abandoning that imbecile party of shreds and patches, to which we know he is officially, but not cordially united. Of that person, Lord B. t‘nus speaks in a note attached to the phrase *Segani*:

From this number must be excepted Canning: Canning is a genius, almost an universal one, an orator, a Wit, a poet, a statesman, and no man of talent can long pursue the path of his late predecessor Lord C. If ever man saved his country, Canning *can*; but *will he*? I for one hope so.'

This last sentence is extremely significant. Faint, 1. fear, is it in his lordship's mind ; fainter, I am sure, is it in the minds of all who duly contemplate thq character and conduct of that semlemm, whose ruling passion, the governing principle of whose life, ever since he drew breath to the present moment, has been self-interest and self-promotion by 21l the arts and tricks of servility. Save his country indeed ! a mere tical figure, my lord; a flight of imagination induﬁ:d amongst the reveries of a creative fancy, which delights to body forth that which has not, nor can have, real existence, and fondly to hope, in the fervour of its iml?ininp, for the coming of that which, in the moments of sober reasoning, it must be convinced will never happen. No, no: the two Georges will stick together, and Canning will closely adhere to an administration which he probably despises, until he is forced from his position by some violence which he cannot resist ; and then—ut plena cruoris hirudo. Let us only recollect how he %:ined the mastery over his sovereign with regard to the Indian expedition, and his becoming one of the ministers of the crown, after the King could not even tolerate him in his presence on account of his eulogium on the Queen ; let us recollect old Bags's loyal reprobation of him, and their mutual spars at each other from their places in their respective seats in parliament, and then ll:at us conclude whether the kope that such a servile, cunning, contriving character as Canning, is capable of the great work of saving his country, be not vain and illusory ! A man competent to that sublime enterprise must be made of very different materials. He may not, and he needs not be, a wit, an orator, a poet, any more than a fiddler or a rope-dancer. These qualifications are perhaps adverse to the character of a man from whom might be expected the salvation of his country. He should possess a species of talents which apparently Mr. C. does not : a large, liberal, and comprehensive mind, per'ect disinterestedness, an abhorrence of corruption, a desire for rational reformation, without which, this country cannot be saved,) and, above all, integrity. The possession of these qualifications, with less brilliant talents than Mr. C. possesses, might tend to save the country.

But another part of Lord B.'s preface deserves attention, and I earnestly recommend its perusal to those who, as his lordship says, are perpetually ringing the changes upon the words *radical*, *blasphemer*, *liberal*, *&c.*, without perhaps once considering the import of those terms, or regarding whether they are properly applied.

'With regard to the objections which have been made on another score to the already published cantos of this vem, I shall content myself with two quotations from oltaire :—*‘ La pudeur s'est enfuite des cceurs, et s'est refugiée sur les levres. Plus les mceurs sont depraves, plus les exrressions deviennent mesurées; on croit regagner en langage ce qu'on a perdu en vertu." This is the real fact, as applicable to the degraded and hypocri‘tical mass which Kzavem the present English fneralion, and is the only answer they deserve. The hackneyed and lavished title of blasphemer—which, with radical, liberal, jacobin, reformer, &c. are the changes which ‘the hirelings are daily ringing in the ears of those who ‘will listen—should be welcome to all who recollect on whom it was originally bestowed. Socrates and Jesus 'Christ were put to death publicly as blasphemers, and so have been and may be many who dare to oppose the most notorious abuses of the name of God ans the mind of man. But persecution is not refutation, nor even triumph : the wretched infidel," as he is called, is probably happier in his prison than the proudest of his assailants. With his opinions I have nothing to do—they mt:{ be right or wrong—but he has suffered for them, and that very suffering for conscience-sake will make more proselytes to deism than the example of heterodox prelates to christianity, suicide statesmen to oppression, or over-pensioned homicides to the impious alliance which insults the world with the name of "holy ! "' These are truths grounded in sound reasoning : they are pungently expressed, and of course will expose the author to the everhisting hatred, and—if they could accomplish it—to the vengeance of the whole crew. They are endeavouring to q{ect his lordship through the medium of his friend and publisher, HuxT, on account of the Vision of Judgment. The trial is postponed till November, and probably it will prove one of the most curious exhibitions that has ever been witnessed : for thereat must be determined the grand question, how long, to a fraction, a king must have been dead before it may be allowed to posterity to discuss his vices, his follies, and even the innocent peculiarities of his character. 'The legitimates will assuredly get themselves into hot water on this occasion, and those who have been accustomed to designate majesty by no other titles than most excellent, most gracious, most wise, and most religious will, I fear, shudder with horror at the application of those terms by the irreverent mouths of counsel, with reference to the character of either George III. or George IV.  
Casca.
