https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18900726/114/0008

Isle of Wight County Press and South of England Reporter
Saturday 26 July 1890

p8

THE HAMPSHIRE FIELD CLUB IN THE ISLAND.

Yesterday (Friday) the Hampshire Field Club paid a visit to the Island. The Southampton contingent, to the number of about 30, loft by th« 8.50 a.in. boat for Cowes. They included Mr. W. Whitaker, 11. A.. F.K.S., F.G.S., president; the Rev. 1.. W. Minns, LL.B., editor; Mr. W. Dale, F.C.S., general secretary; and Mr. T. W. Shore, F.C.S., F.C.S., organising secretary. At Cowes they were joined by the Rev. Father Dnris and Mr. C. VV. Colenutt, the local secretary for the Isle of Wight, who acted as director of the excursion; and on arriving at Newport Station at 10.15 they were met by Dr. Groves, with whom were Mr. J. Dore and Mr. L. C. Richards, of Newport. Here, also, they were augmented by a contingent from Uyde, which comprised the Rev. R. Nutt, the Rev. —. Barnicott, Mr. F. Newman (borough surveyor), and Mr. Councillor Pollard. They proceeded at once to the Isle of Wight Museum in Quay-street, where an address was given Dr. Groves, who said that coming as they did into a district full of objects of interest, the Hampshire Field Club would naturally expect to see more extensive collection, and he proceeded to explain the reasons for its limited nature. Interest in antiquarian matters was fostered in the last century by the cultivated family who occupied Appuldurcombe House, and especially towards the end of the century by the publication of Worsley’s History, and this interest was further stimulated by the controversy which arose at the beginning of the present century over Englclield's works. The interest thus excited found practical expression in the Isle of Wight Philosophical Society, which was established in 1810 or 1813 in Nash's Isle of Wight Institution. The Doctor here remarked that it was this architect who also built the pretentious Town Hall which replaced the old structure, photograph of which was handed round. The Rev. Mr. Kell took an active part in the society, and members and friends deposited with it various objects which eventually formed the Isle of Wight Museum, of which Mr. Kell was custodian from 1825 to 1850. In 1852 great desire was felt for the establishment of public museum, the Corporation of Newport lent room for the purpose, and Dr. Wilkins got the society to consent to the removal thereto of their collection. In 1855 the British Archaeological Association met in the Island, and in consequence of the increasing interest thus aroused objects flowed in to the museum. In an evil moment it was decided to take rooms for its accommodation, and a difficulty arising as to the payment of rent the collection was dispersed. Mr. Roach Pittis, the present president the Literary Society, and Ur. John Wood, one of its greatest benefactors, hearing that it was proposed to send the collection out of the Island, interested themselves in preventing it, the members of the committee subscribed for its Eurcbase, and it was deposited on their premises, le feared, however, that it would be soon sent on its wanderings again because of the jealousy of some of the members of the society as to the room it occupied. They would understand that, broken up and removed as the collection bad been, many objects must have been lost. The Doctor then pointed out some of the most remarkable objects in the Museum, calling special attention to the articles taken from barrows and tumuli in the neighbourhood. said the Museum was present a lumber house for many things not belonging to the district, and be considered that the collection of local objects—except in geology —was very poor. A brief discussion took place and various opinions were advanced on some of the specimens referred to, after which Ur. Shore thanked Dr, Groves for his interesting address, which ought make them, as a club, do what they could to prevent that collection from being scattered, and he thought be was expressing the sentiments of the Field Club in saving they would co-operate with lir. Groves and the sodety in preventing such a loss to the district. From the Museum visits were paid to the shop of Mr. J. K. Alderslade in Hign-street, for toe purpose of inspecting an old carved bracket found in the demolished boildiag next door ; to St. Thomas’s-square, where the members were interested in the two fine specimens of old domestic buildings, God's Providence House (Mr. W. Wells) and Holyrood House” (Mrs. Dyer); and the site of the Swan Inn to see the ancient well discovered nnder the foundations of that old hostelry, on the road to which passing attention was excited by Hazards Uonse (Mr. W. L. Gubbins). At 11.25 the party proceeded by train to the Ningwood Station of the Freshwater Railway, where they were received by the Rev. J. Thomas, vicar of Shalfleet, and the Rev. J. Vicars, rector of Caibourne. From thence walk was taken to Shalfleet, a halt first being made at Palmer’s Green Farm, where attention was called to the >msa of Bembridge limestone in the construction of the farm buildings. Mr. Colenutt said this stone was formerly quarried very largely in the neighbourhood, especially at Dodpitta, and it was of wonderful .quality building stone. Among the large number of buildings in which it was used he tmentioned Winchester Cathedral and Beaulieu .Abbey. Dr. Groves said there was at Winchester 'Roman altar made of this stone. Mr. Shore thought it extraordinary that the people of Newport should have used Bath stone for their church—stone which began to crumble in 30 years, when in their own neighbourhood there was stone which would endure for centuries. Arrived at Shalfleet, the party entered the venerable church, where they were taken in charge by the Rev. J. Thomas and conducted at once to the spacious interior of the great Norman tower, where the courteens vicar gave an interesting account of the history of the manor and pariah and a description of the church. In cordially welcoming the club to his ancient pariah, he said the fact of their having chosen such an ont-of-ths way place for their field day ought to stir np some the inhabitants to try and find osd all that could be found respecting their old church, their manors, and their mill. Five of tha seven manors still in existence were mentioned in the Domesday Book, viz., Shalfleet, Watohingwell, Uamstead, Wellow, and Hulverstone. That ancient authority set forth that Shalfleet was held by one Gozelin, the son of Azor, and that it contained 14 ploughlands, two in demesne, and villeins and 19 borderers with two plough-lands and a half. There were also a mill worth (assessed at) lid., four acres of meadow, a church, and woods for 20 bogs. The value of the whole of the land was £2O, and three men were named as holding certain portions of it under the Norman lord, viz., dleoffty or Goisfrid, Turgi, and Hot. The Manor •of Watcbingwelle or Watefaingwood was noted for « well which still bore the naase of St. Winifred’s Well, and important point In connection with this manor was the fact that half a bide, or about acres, of land was taken from it to form the King’s park. This, Wore ley pointed out, was formed 60 or 60 years before tbs park of Woodstock was created by Henry 11., and it was therefore the first royal park. Mr. Thomas next touched on the connection of the Trenchard family with the Manor of Shalfleet, and quoted Sir John Oglander's account of them from Mr. Long's edition of the old knight’s Memoirs,” concluding with the statement that they sowlde the Island by degrees, and have now sowlde all and seated themselves in Dorsetshire. ’’ This was in the reign Edward IV., and sinss then the manor had passed through several bands until it was now the property of Sir Barrington Simeon, Bart., of Swainatam The mill mentioned in Domesday Book was not the site of the present one, but was generally supposed to have bean below tbs chords and jest above the old Viearage garden, Tbs mill was granted to Abbey Qearr, and the grant was confirmed by two charters, at the end of tbs second of which occurred tbs asms of Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, who no doubt was Thomas k Beckett, to whom tbs old church at Newport was dadioatsd soon after his murder in Canterbury Cathedral in 1170. Hr. Tboosae concluded reading tbs description Hhalilsot Church drawn up Mr. W. T. Stratton, of Carlsbraoko, an acknowledged authority, who in waiting 

to the vicar in conducting the visitors over the building. Among the objects noticed were the graceful columns of Purbeck marble dividing the nave from the south aisle, the quaint Elizabethan pulpit of carved oak, and two modiceval stone coHin lids. One of the latter, bearing the knightly shield and spear of the Trenebards, received considerable attention, and Mr. B. Greenfield, i F.S.A., who was said to groat authority on I heraldry, declared it to be worthy ornament for any cathedral. A few minutes were allowed at Bhalfieet for lunch, which the visitors had been warned to bring with them ; and advantage was taken of the interval by the botanists of the party to secure , specimens of the plants of the neighbourhood, > supply of which had been kindly provided by Messrs. NV. and K. Lock.

Lunch over, the walk was resumed by the charming footpath leading past the old mill to Newtown, where the vicar, the Rev. H. R. Venn, was found waiting to the honours of the ancient borough. A halt was made in front of the old Town Hall, and here the following paper was read by Mr. Colenutt:

The portion of the Isle of Wight on which this meeting of the Field Club is taking place is one of which the past history is of much interest. In taking a hasty survey of the town or village of Newtown one is struck by the absence of old buildings or any other tangible indications of former importance. It is not in its architectural features, but in its municipal history, that the antiquary will find subjects for investigation and study at Newtown, and the very absence of any old buildings is of itself interesting. A glance at the map of the Island will show the town situated on a tongue of land formed by two of the branching arms of the estuary known as the Newtown River, and in bygone times, when ships of large burthen were unknown and when the only vessels were galleys or vessels of light draught, this estuary would have afforded safe anchorage and harbour. In medieval times there appear to have been six chief towns in the Island, these being Yarmouth, Newtown (or Francheville, as it was then called), Carisbrooke, Brading, Sandown (or Sandham), and Woolverton. There seems to be reason for supposing that Woolverton, however, was never of great importance, being little more than a large fishing village situate on the eastern shore of Brading Harbour. Its site was visited by the Field Club in July, 1887, and no doubt the circumstance will be remembered by some of the members present here to-day. Of Woolverton nothing now remains save some obscure traces of the course of the streets in the copse which now covers the ground. The events which led to the complete destroction of Woolverton affected Francbeville in no less degree; but on the ruins of Francheville arose the Newtown, and some of its prosperity returned to it. One of the first misfortunes which befell the town appears to have been the plundering of it by the Danes on their invasion of the Island in the year 1001, when they virtually took possession the Isle of Wight and used it as a rendezvous for their pillaging excursions on the mainland. We read at this time of the burning of villages and the destruction of town called Wealtham. This seems to have been a large hamlet which stood on the site of the modern Wellow, village lying between Shalfleet and Freshwater. During the three hundred years following Francbeville doubtless shared in the miseries of the dwellers in the Isle of Wight through the repeated raids made by the Normans and the French. In August of the year 1577 the French made a descent on the Island, and Woolverton and Francbeville both suffered most severely, being completely burnt to the ground. Yarmouth, or, as it was then called, Eremuthe, also shared like fate. The inhabitants were so terrified by the successes of the invaders that they fled to Carisbrooke Castle for protection. Newport was attacked and burnt, but retribution was not long delayed. Sir Hugh Tyrrel was at this time Captain of the Castle, and with the garrison be made sally towards the south part of the town, at the same time placing large portion of his force in ambush. The unwary Frenchmen fell into the trap, and a complete slaughter of the invaders was the result. The place of the ambush was called in spirit of derision Noddies-hill, and its modern name is Node-hill; Deadman’s-lane in the vicinity also derived its name from this incident. The reasons which led to the founding of the New-port operated also against prosperity returning to Newtown. For ships were built of larger size and trade by was increasing ; the merchants resided in the midst of the larger community at Carisbrooke and Newport, and thither the local maritime trade gravitated. That Newtown was of little importance in the reign of Henry VIII. may be inferred from the fact of that king taking no measures to fortify it as he did with Yarmouth, Cowes, Sandown, and other places on the coasts of Hampshire and the Isle of Wight. Worsley tells that Newtown was borough by prescription, and its first representation in Parliament was in the twenty-seventh year of the reign of Queen Elisabeth. Aymer, Bishop of Winchester, granted privileges to his town of Francheville, of which was lord by deed dated at Swainston; the legality of these privileges being subsequently confirmed by Edward II., Edward IV., and Queen Elizabeth. Francheville doubt derived its name from its rights of holding fairs and markets, and in charter of Edward II. the King grants to his son Edward, Earl of Chester, afterwards Edward 111, market to be held at his town of Francheville every Wednesday, and a fair for three days annually, on the feast of St. Mary Magdalen, on the eve preceding and the day following. No market or fair has been held here for several centuries, and it is doubtful if the privileges were exercised at all after the destruction of the town in 1377. It still continued however to exist as a corporate body, and bought and sold real estate under a common seal, a good representation of which may be seen over the Inn door and also in the east window of the church. The qualification of burgess appears to have been the holding of a borough land, the rent of which was paid to the Mayor and Chief Burgess, this burgage tenure carrying with it also the right to vote for a member of Parliament. Until the passing of the Reform Act, Newtown— a typical pocket borough — sent two members to Parliament. John Churchill, afterwards Duke at Marlborough, represented this place in 1678. It is not wonderful that round two towns which passed through such vicissitudes as Woolverton and Francheville there should gather legendary matter. In regard to Woolverton there ia quaint legend concerning its destruction by the French, but which is too long to be detailed here. At Newtown we have an example of the "Pied Piper" legend, and in the Island town of Francheville this itinerant musician seems to have created quite as much dismay and destruction among its peaceable but money-loving inhabitants as he did on the occasion of his visit to Hamelin. At this place the children are said to have been led down into the Solent, detail which I believe usually takes a local turn in examples of this legend. The study of the legends of Hampshire and especially those having distinctly local bearing is one which is of much interest, and which would make attractive object for investigation at meetings of the Field Club.

The paper was illustrated by map copied in 1768 from an older one, and lent to the club by Mr. A. H. Estcourt, C.A., J.P. Mr. Shore, in the course of same remaaks on the paper, said this was the most interesting map he had seen in any part of Hampshire as an example of burgage tenure, and he sincerely hoped that, if permission could be obtained, they might publish it in their Proceedings.

The Vicar having described the mode of electing the Parliamentary representatives of the borough the older time, a visit was made to the interior of the hall, permission having bean granted Sir Barrington Simeon. Here were pointed out the tables at which the Corporation used to discern their business and their dinners, the fine old royal arms in carved and pointed wood, the curious inkstand with its sand and wafer boxes, &c.; and the extensive view from the top of the flight of steps was duly admired.

Proceeding by way of "High-street," the church was reached, where the vicar gave an account of the rebuilding of the edifice, explaining that the Charity Commissioners compelled the Corporation to put by a certain sum for its endowment, they were unable to erect a building as large as the original one. The architect, however, adhered to its style as far possible, and the vicar pointed out the striking resemblance of the groined roof and the windows to a portion of Salisbury Cathedral, of which it was an almost exact reproduction. The church was dedicated to the Holy Spirit, a dedication which was vary rare in England— he believed there were only two other instances in the country. He suggested that the original dedication may have been to St. Mary Magdalen, seeing that the old fair was held on St. Mary Magdalen's day, and the glebe formerly attached to the church was called St Margaret's Croft.

Outside the church the President of club said they had that day had the pleasure hearing two clergymen explain their churches— the Rev. J. Thomas and the Rev. H. R. Venn. They always experienced great help from the local clergy in their outings; they were glad to hear all they could tell them, and in return they as a club were glad to assist the clergy in the preservation of their buildings.

Mr. Shore recognised the readiness of Mr. Thomas and Mr. Venn to assist him as organising secretary, and said he hoped the Isle of Wight would be induced to found a branch of the club.

The Rev. J. Thomas said they received great benefit from the visit of the club. It had so stirred him up during the last fortnight that he had during that period learned store his church than ever before.

The Rev. H. R. Venn thought they ought to thank the club for the great pleasure and distinction conferred upon the village, in which great interest had been felt in the visit. He congratulated the club on the statement in their programme that their number was so complete that there was not room for Mr. Thomas and himself.

Leaving Newtown, the visitors wended their way foot to the gardens of Stone Steps, Calbourne, the summer beauty of which was greatly appreciated, as was also the capital tea served in the large tent on the pleasant lawn.

The return journey from Calbourne station was timed for 4.44, and while waiting on the platform the President thanked the conductors of the day, Mr. Colenutt and Dr. Groves, for their services, remarking that the latter had justified the action of the committee in taking him in as an extra member.

Arriving at Newport station the party separated on its several ways, all agreeing that a most delightful day had been spent.


TH: H. Venn (Henry) was possibly son of Revd. John Venn, and brother of mathematician John Venn, remembered best as the creator of Venn diagrams.
https://www.sunsigns.org/famousbirthdays/d/profile/john-venn/


TH: John Churchill, afterwards Duke at Marlborough, represented this place (Newtown) in 1678.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931209/126/0010

Isle of Wight County Press and South of England Reporter
Saturday 09 December 1893

p10

THE PIED PIPER AT NEWTOWN.

*To the Editor of the Ide of Wight County Press.*

Sir, —Mr. Joseph Jacobs commences his volume of "More English Fairy Tales," recently published by David Nutt, with an account of the doings of the Pied Piper of Newtown. Thanks to Browning, we are all of us familiar with what transpired on the Piper’s visit to Hamelin, but his connection with Newtown is not so generally known. The story has hitherto, so far as I am aware, only been told at length in a scarce book "Talas and Legends of the Isle of Wight" by Abraham Elder (London, 1839) and in a small volume of verse published by Beata Elizabeth Macaulay in 1869. It is from Elder's book that Mr. Jacobs has obtained the tale, though it has been abridged and partly rewritten for him by Mr. Nutt. In his notes on the legend (pp. 218—220) Mr. Jacobs doubts whether it is a genuine Isle of Wight story and inclines to tha belief that, in order to fill up his volume, Elder localised at Newtown version of the Hamelin legend. Mr. Jacobs's remarks are as follows:  "Before Browning it (the Hamelin story) had been told in English in books well known Verstegan's 'Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, 1606,' Howell's 'Familiar Letters,' and Wanley's 'Wonders of the Little World.' Browning is said to have taken it from the last source, though there are touches which seem to to come from Howell, while it is not impossible he may have come across Elder's book, which was illustrated by Cruikshank. ... The chief question of interest attaching to the English form of the legend given in 1839 by Elder is whether it is independent of the German myth. It does not occur in any of the local histories of the Isle of Wight which I have been able to consult of a date previous to Elder's book, e.g., J. Hassell, 'Tour of the Isle of Wight, 1790.' Mr. Shore, in his 'History of Hampshire, 1891,' p. 185, refers the legend, but evidently bases his reference on Eldar, e=and so with all the modern references I have seen. Now Elder himself quotes Verstegan in his comments on the legend, pp. 168-9 and note, and it is impossible to avoid conjecturing that he adapted Verstegan to the locality. . . . Newtown had been a populous town before the French invasion of the Island of *temp.* Richard II. It is just possible that there may have been a local legend to account for the depopulation by an exodus of children. But the expression 'pied piper' which Elder uses clearly came from Verstegan, aad until evidence is shown to the contrary the whole of the legend was adapted from him." The story is not mentioned either by Worsley or Albin, though if it existed in their day they may have considered it beneath the "dignity of history." Inquiries on the spot, from old inhabitants of Newtown and its neighbourhood, ought to be able to clear the matter up. If it turns out that the legend is current in the locality and that old people say they heard it as children from the lips of their mothers and grandmothers, then we may fairly say that Elder has detailed a genuine Isle of Wight story; otherwise we must conclude, with Mr. Jacobs, that he has fathered on Newtown a version of the German myth. The matter is one of considerable interest, and there must be many among your readers who are in position to make the necessary inquiries at Newtown, and I sincerely trust that some of them will do so and will record the result in your columns. If the story turns out to be a genuine Isle Wight one, it would be very interesting to have the exact form in which it is told, preserving, if possible, the dialect, if the person from whose lips it is taken down uses it.— Yours obediently,

William Self Weeks.

Clitheroe, Dec. 4th, 1893.

---

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001960/18931216/025/0002

Isle of Wight County Press and South of England Reporter

Saturday 16 December 1893
p2

THE PIED PIPER OF NEWTOWN

*To the Editor of the Isle of Wight County Press.*

Sir, — I think I can assure Mr. W. S. Weeks that then ia no foundation, legendary or otherwise, to Abraham Elder's story of the Newtown Piper. To judge by its situation, Newtown would be no doubt a happy hunting gruind for rata, both English and Hanoverian, though, unfortunately, I have found but few traces anywhere in the Isle of Wight of the English rat. The whole legend, including its adaptation. localisation, and publication, may be set down to the fertile brain Abraham Elder. Mr. Weeks speaks of the "Tales and Legends of the Isle of Wight" by Abraham Elder, London. 1839. Abraham Elder produced in that year two issues of his "Tales and Legends." The first issue wasa small book of 196 pages with only four illustrations, drawn, I conjecture, by Abraham Elder himself. The illustration for page 4 has the curious blunder of the number 116 being substituted for 4. This smaller issue is called on the title page "Part the first." This issue has a value of its own, as it contains as a frontispiece a view of the Needles, showing the original needle rock. This frontispiece may have been meant by Abraham Elder to be included amongst the legends of the Isle of Wight. In the same year came out the issue of the "Tales and Legends." This issue is a much larger volume, it contains 336 pages, with 14 large and 11 small woodcuts by Robert Cruikshank. The illustration of page 4 of the first issue is reproduced as a vignette on page 8 of this second issue, otherwise the 25 illustrations are entirely different from the illustrations of the first issue. Of this second issue a second edition appeared in 1843, but in no way differing from first edition. I have tried to find out the real name of Abraham Elder. I have leaned that he either was native of, or lived in, Shanklin and that to his parents he owed the name of Clayton, but I have not yet been able to find out what name was given him by his godfather and godmother. I should be much obliged to any of yours readers who would give me this information. —Yours obediently, R.G. D.

+++++

*To the Editor of the Isle of Wight County Press.*

Sir,— Seeing in your paper of the 9th inst. a letter by Mr, W. Self Weeks, who wants to know if ever the Pied Piper was in existence at Newtown, I, as one of the oldest inbabitants of the place, can only say that the first I ever heard of his existence was in a paper read by Mr. Colenutt, of the Hampshire Field Club, on the occasion of the Club's visit to Newtown some time back. The address was recorded in the County Press. The part concerning the Pied Pier was as follows: "At Newtown we have an example of the Pied Piper legend, and in the Island town of Francheville this itinerant musician seems to have created quite as much dismay and destruction among its peaceable but money-loving inhabitants as he did on the occasion of his visit to Hamelin. At this place the children are said to have ben lead down into the Solent, detail which I believe usually takes a local turn in examples of this legend." It appears by this record that he did visit Newtown or Francheville, which will take you back to 1377, whan Newtown was known Francbeville. As to what became of him I cannot say. Probably, if got making noise in the place at that period, the French most likely would take him as a spy in the garb of minstrel. There are but three families besides my own in modern Newtown who were in the place 50 years ago. I have made inquiries of them concerning the Pied Piper, and they know nothing of the legend. I have in my possession an octagonal metal button, about the size of penny-piece, which was dug at Newtown, but whether it belonged to the Pied Piper’s coat I cannot say. If this information, which I have extracted from my little work "Historical Gleanings of Newtown," is of any use to your correspondent, he is welcome to it with my compliments.— I am, Sir, your obedient servant, J. H. Woolgar.

Newtown, Dec. 1 1893.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000494/18450607/034/0008

Hampshire Advertiser
Saturday 07 June 1845
p8

Cowes, Saturday June 7

Royal Yacht Squadron Intelligence
Arrivals

June 3 *Elizabeth* Hon Augustus Moreton, from Guernsey

Fashionable Arrivals. The following are among members of the R. Y. S. who have visited the Squadron Houe during the week: ..., Hon. Augustus Moreton, ...


---