Pysanky


pyrsynker

From back before anyone could remember, the darkest, evilest monster had been chained to a rock, deep in cold, dark cave, high up in the mountains.

The monster would remain there on one condition: that each year, in the month before Easter, and only then, the women of the place would meditate for a day and then, in the evening, with the children in bed and men-folk sent elsewhere, they would make pyrsynker, beautiful eggs painted with intricate blessings, intricate designs. The egg itself represents the boundess universe and eternal life. Each colour, each sign, each shape written on the egg has its own symbolic meaning. Dots represent the stars, the Gypsy roads, a neverending line separating two diffferently coloured areas represented a labyrinth that could trap evil spirits; yellow represented purity, the harvest, love and benevolence, orange was strength, blue, though rarely used, trust and the life giving air. Family tradition passes designs through the generations, and each year, as the women get more skilled, the designs become ever more elaborate. And if the egg is broken, then bad luck will surely follow.

Each year, the monster would summon his demons and send them to corners of the world, checking, checking to see if the blessings were still being made. The more Pysanky [pyrsynker] were made, the tighter would be bound the chains. But if the blessings, weren't made, then the chains would be loosened and evil would be wrought on the world.

While we had Easter this weekend just gone by, in Eastern Europe, the Church follows the Orthodox calendar. And so if you see pictures this weekend of beautiful painted eggs amongst the wreckage and devastation, now you know a little of the story behind them.



https://www.ukrainiansoulfood.ca/ 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MSirAetg4nc hello bloop check this your Baba here
and today I want to talk to you about ancient Easter tradition and that is writing blessing on person care Easter egg and Ukrainian people and other Slavic people have been doing this for thousands of years you know back in kievan rus' are artists actual make piercing key from ceramic and they last very long time and one reason that we switch to mostly using real egg from chicken is because then these predators come you know Vikings come to to murder us and steal all our resources and eventually become Russian is they don't want to steal eggs no matter how beautiful because they're going to break in their hairy loin cloth bag or whatever it is Viking used to carry thing no it's not civilized person you know they don't have you know like backpack or purse okay and they don't know what about are either wars okay so I'm passing here this shape of egg was chosen because it's perfect is round and seamless and the shape of cosmos and and it represent boundless universe and eternal life so whatever your belief system is you know we know we know that life go on forever and other miraculous thing about egg is that life come forth from it when it finally break you know you get a new life so our ancestors recognized this thousands of years ago and start using our egg to write blessings for abundance prosperity good luck and protection so and that is what different symbols on egg mean now it's very important that every year you make at least one piece Inca they have spiral design not only because is another symbol of eternal life because a symbol of our DNA you know and universes is also a type of spiral but Bob are going to leave all that to Stephen Hawking okay this is video about the missing car but make spiral because this trap evil inside center of maze and now that okra ena is under yet again another genocide you want to power trap Putin inside the spiral and POW trap invading Russians inside spiral so that evil cannot spread okay but evil is nothing new on this planet and a long time ago we construct legend about this monster okay so this is my original reason we make piston here monster is he looks something like combination of Bugs Bunny Tasmanian Devil yo her combined with Putin he have a one eye in middle of forehead is flaming red you know bloodshot and he have his ears hang low and he have big ugly pimple on pie that he keep filming for that part of YouTube we don't admit we visit okay so in this monster he is trapped he is chained to rock in cold dark cave somewhere near Kremlin and every year this monster he summoned his demons and he sent them out flying to four corners of earth to find out whether we are still writing blessings on pissing here and giving them to each other to bless other people and animals and crops and planet okay because as long as we are doing that monster cannot break free from this heavy chain and rock because if he does then evil will fly moose on into overtake our world poop jerk this is not good thing okay so you every year you want to make as many pizzica as you can and you know bother been seeing this trend especially on Facebook that she is not happy about people making criticism of other people piss thinking you know lying is not perfect or I don't like this design so much order ANCA this is not what what is meant to be you know I not everybody is artists not everybody can make perfect line perfect circle perfect spiral what is important is that you make peace inca and that you do this with your whole heart you know I guess last week I post some photographs of piercing her from turn of 20th century from 1903 from Bukhara ena and it was not perfect you know there was some was crooked some was obvious made by child and you just keep making them because its purpose is intent of passing credit matter because if we stop and if we make others stop making piercing car because it's not perfect you know we just adding fuel to monsters fire okay they do not want him to break loose from Brock so um Baba want you to make lots and lots and you make sure that the monster cannot let loose his evil on world okay so I also want you to know that on my website you can click sign up above and you go to get free pasta and vodka recipes on my website and if you are on your youtube link is below so my traditional Easter bread recipes are there and also when you are on my website click Easter because his entire Easter page and Baba a tell you longer story about the piercing ki and Easter tradition and also is instructions on how to make egg very ancient way from natural vegetable dye like beet and spinach and berries and and onion skin and even coffee I'm not sure how long we have coffee but anyway you can make beautiful dies from from vegetables so make sure that you click this link and and also is the entire Easter chapter in my book Bubba's kitchen Ukrainian soul food is recipes for making perfect this thing don't make perfect but you know almost perfect glazed ham and also a horseradish sauce and lots of recipes for eggs because if if you use natural vegetable dye then you can eat those eggs a sink of course you don't eat but is is wonderful whole chapter of egg recipes and a separate easter recipes and Veronica opera hey and Halep see and everything in here 200 s recipes and home remedies so you go and you start making piercing cow poop chick and don't you worry about making perfect okay and the bubble would love if you post your pictures of anything you make for Easter right now on her Facebook page please brush you I would everyone appreciate you know these pictures of your piercing carrier your paska whatever you making seen by thousands of people and so much appreciation okay and don't you make no wooden garbage rose poop chick --- [cheers - budmo  (boodmo) - hey - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WTCfy2jVE_g ] 
--- https://web.archive.org/web/20170424180347/http://www.ukrainiansoulfood.ca/easter.php  & Krashanky: Easter Eggs
The ancient story of how good overcomes evil  Below story is instruction and colour chart for making krashanky, Ukrainian egg with vegetable dye!  Pysanky is Ukrainian tradition many thousand year old. Is woman sacred obligation to write blessing on egg every year. She then give away as many as possible. This not ritual like some kind weirdo modern thing these people make up who dancing with crystal on head and moaning in park. One day they Greek god, next day they some kind rootsy-tootsy Gypsy. Only can't sing. They should try keep up dancing, singing with me and other women at Ukrainian festival. They think they New Age. Ha! I show them Old Age. Listen and Baba will tell you pysanka story. You have my permission read this to children. Is good for them understand how to fight evil. Is terrible monster live deep in cave. Probably more ice cold bunker like Hitler have, only near Kremlin. He chain to rock since beginning of time. This monster look like cross between that Bugs Bunny Tasmanian Devil and politician who have fierce orange eye so close together, look like only one in middle forehead. You know who I mean. Eye is narrow like mind, so you can always tell. If you follow this voting advice, you never wrong. No, eye can't be orange. This is color of Ukrainian liberation. Correction. Eye is Soviet red. Also, monster is little bit too hairy to be normal. This not always true for politician, good or bad. Use your discrimination. Monster have ear that hang low, pimple on thigh and bad breath. He film himself for YouTube. He is guard by three goddess call Zorya, or stars. They is goddess of dawn, goddess of dusk and goddess of midnight. They also decide people fate. Every spring, ugly monster send out demon into four corner of earth. They scout to see if people still loving each other, still writing blessing on egg and giving them away. If so, monster sad. He stay chain to rock another year. If we stop writing blessing on egg, happy monster break chain and pow! He fly loose with demon and destroy whole world. This why egg written with symbol for all sort of good life thing: sun, animal, plant, cross of four direction, vine and Baba Spider, she who weave Universe. Why egg? Is eternal shape of cosmos and sun. Tell us life continue always and that monster never going to win. But we have to fulfill sacred obligation to planet and our Creator. When you making pysanky, you blow out inside for amulet against evil. If someone wishing for baby, you leave yolk inside. Never boil egg. Inside must stay alive. You don't want to eat what come out when you blow. Will have dye in white and yolk, so can be toxic. If you draw ancient spiral shape on egg, spiral will trap evil and not allow to escape. I know you going to run to Internet to find out how to make these beautiful egg. Is better if you find Ukrainian Baba at cultural centre or church who show you how to make. Is also meditation that go with this. You supposed to meditate for whole day on blessing before starting to write on egg. Also not fight with no one for this time. Baba have to admit, sometime she fail this spiritual test. These women who make so beautiful pysanky not allow to do this any other time of year except for one month before Easter. This add to spiritual power of egg. Over lifetime, a woman pysanky get a little better each year. Is good reminder that her ovary and uterus important, too. Is not just thing for childbearing, then throw away. Egg shape is eternal also inside woman. Baba is supporter of HERS Foundation For Women. Many uses for pysanky: Girl give one to boy she like. We put in furrow and under beehive for fertile crop. We keep in house to turn away lightning and fire. Only thing you not do is eat. Is really, really bad luck to intentional break shell sacred amulet. Is like using Jesus statue for batting practice or spit on Torah. Terrible. After church, family gather around family grave and eat lunch. We leave all leftover for ancestor, along with pysanky for blessing. We eat colored egg at lunch too, call krashanky. They one solid color. Very beautiful if color made from beet juice or tea.  We throw shell into river, to let Nature know we not forget her on Great Day. Shell travel down to ocean, where all soul live. This how we bless ancestor collective conscious. That Jung guy, he taking credit. Pah! ~Your Baba



http://www.stnicholasukrainianchurch.org/ukrainian-easter/pysanky-legends

https://wiki.eastkingdom.org/images/6/66/Pysanky.pdf




----


Pokati - Goroshek (little rolling pea)

Man, wife, six sons, daughter (Alyonka). Sons plough field, sister bring lunch. Dig furrow to follow. But serpent/dragon saw what was happening, and diverted the furrow. Sons came home hungry and asked where sister was. Followed furrow to dragon's courtyard. Dragon came back, captured them, imprisoned them.

Mother was walking to do the washing, a pea came rolling towards here. Stepped down, picked it up, and ate it. Soon her belly bgean to swell, and soon after that she had a baby - Pokati-Goroshek, little Rolling Pea.

Grew up big and strong. Huge rock, lifted out himself, other men afraid. One day, founf huge lump of iron and it.

One day asked about brothers & sisters. Told they had disappeared. Will go and search. Iron to blacksmih make sword. Threw it up, slept twlve days, raised fist and split it in two; took it back; stronger sword. Trheew it up, sept 12 days, bent it a little.

Followed memory of the furrow, saw maiden, she told story, he said nothing. Dragon came back, fought, killed dragon. Freed brothers, took gold, starting making way back. Sat under oak tree, fell asleep. Brothers, ashamed, tied him up, leaving him to be eaten by wild beasts, went home, much celebration. Pokati Gorashek woke up, pulled up oak tree, walked home with it. HEard brothers asking mother about other children, heard had brother who must have been one to rescue them. Rolling Pea threw the oak against the house,  stay where you are if that's what you are and I will roam the world. With his sword, he strode off.