# Roscommon Belief in Fairies

TO DO

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000196/18680808/202/0006
Aris's Birmingham Gazette - Saturday 08 August 1868

Belief in "fairies" is a characteristic feature of the lower classes in Ireland. At Riverstown, County Cork, an old woman named Mary Keefe has been committed for trial charged with obtaining money by false pretences from a poor woman named Murray. The latter had a child seriously ill, and putting her trust in Keefe's boasted powers, the accused obtained money from Mrs. Murray, under the pretence that she had constant communication with the fairies, and through their influence could cure the sick child.

---


A year on from conmel, another example:

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000472/18960309/068/0003
Greenock Telegraph and Clyde Shipping Gazette - Monday 09 March 1896

Mysterious Deaths in Ireland.— An Athlone telegram reports the news of a mysterious death which occurred on Friday night or Saturday morning near Lough Funcheon, a remote place in County Roscommon. Deceased is a young man named James Cunningham, son of a prosperous farmer, and the father and three brothers have been taken into custody. It seems that young Cunningham had during the past fortnight exhibited symptoms of mental derangement. He refused to aubmit to the examination of a medical man whom his friends summoned, and it is stated that on Friday night, during the Lenten devotional exercises, which were being held in the house, a struggle took place. The body of young Cunningham, who was a powerful man, weighing seventeen stone, was discovered by the police severely mangled, while the rest of the family had fled to neighbour's house.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/BL/0000098/18960309/017/0007?browse=true
Pall Mall Gazette - Monday 09 March 1896

EXORCISING A SPIRIT IN IRELAND

TERRIBLE DOMESTIC TRAGEDY.

A strange affair, apparently possessing affinity with the Tipperary witch-burning case, has occurred in a lonely district about nine miles from Athlone. A young man named James Cunningham, a shoemaker by trade, and living with his father, a respectable farmer, developed a fortnight ago a certain strangeness of manner. He refused, however, to see a medical man, affirming he had more need of a priest, and his family became imbued with the idea that he was possessed by an evil spirit. On Friday night, when everyone was at family prayers, Cunningham, who was a tall, powerful man, suddenly got excited, and, leaping up, seized his father by the throat. Thereupon the other members of the family seemed to have intervened, and a struggle ensued, resulting in the death of Cunningham, whose body, horribly mutilated, was found next morning in the house by the police. The father, three brothers, and a sister, who had during the night sought shelter at a neighbour's, have been arrested.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000162/18960309/044/0005

Dundee Courier - Monday 09 March 1896

SHOCKING AFFAIR IN IRELAND.

A remarkable affair, apparently possessing affinity with the Tipperary witch-burning case, has occurred in a lonely district some nine miles from Athlone. A young man named Jas. Cunningham, a shoemaker by trade, and living with his father, a respectable farmer, developed a fortnight ago a certain strangeness of manner. He refused, however, to see a medical man. affirming that he had more need of a priest, and his family became imbued with the idea that he was possessed by an evil spirit. On Friday night, when everyone was at family prayers, Cunningham, who was a tall, powerful man, suddenly got excited, and, leaping up, seized his father by the throat. Thereupon the other members of the family seem to have intervened, and a struggle ensued, resulting in the death of Cunningham, whose body, horribly mutilated, was found next morning in the house by the police. The father, three brothers, and a sister, who had during the night sought shelter in a neighbour's, stating they were afraid to remain in their own dwelling, have been arrested. The incident has locally caused a profound sensation.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000433/18960309/060/0004
Dublin Evening Mail - Monday 09 March 1896

TERRIBLE TRAGEDY IN ROSCOMMON, Ati ly of a most revolting character, unhappily, in every 1 disclosed, and attended -with results so distressing in their character‘as to miark it as one of the most dreadful.ever recorded in the County Ros- ccurred on Friday in the district of Lecartow, about 12 miles from Athlone, and bordering on Galway and Roscommon, Ramonr of the murder reached Athlone about three on Saturday afternoon. and official information was received at the St Clair Ruthven and Captain Preston, uarters shortly after, and Mr R M, immediately proceeded to the place, which is far removed from the railway, and only accessible by car, after some two hours’ drive. The houge in which the tragedy took:place is a substantial one-story build- ing. The kitchen and bedroom are on the first. floor, and divided by a thin wall and-door, In the bedroom was found the murdered man lying partly on the table, in a dreadful condition. His face was as to be almost un- The upper lip and a great of the chin were completely His eyes were protruding, and under them were several severe flesh wounds, while his breast and throat, which were exposed, revealed several long his hands were lace: in numerous places. The other of the body further marks of violence. The story asso- ciated with the most’ painfut character, and absence motive for the brutal murder renders it all the more inexplicable, except, indeed, the statement that flie entire family have been forsome days suffering from mental affection. All the -persons with the tragedy are menibers of one family (including the murdered man),.named Cunningham. They live in a-village, or rather hamlet, termed Lesphelan, in which there are in all seven houses, occupied by people of the same name and relative They are of the farming class, in a fairly well-to-do condition, and the deceased, James Cunningham, carried on in the touse the trade of boot and shoe maker. Nothing unusual was noticed in his demeanour until about a fortnight ago, when the unfortunate man returned from Athlone in a strangely excited state, thus drawing the attention of his father and brothers to him. The police became aware of the fact, and for some days past gave more than cus- tomary attention to the district, but relaxed their surveillance within the past week. On Monday last one of the deceased man's brothers called at the Presbytery, and in- formed the priest of his strange demeanour. He was visited by the curate, and seemed to derive much consolation from his visit, and Cnt. and tte he man became entirely demented, and his un- happy state excited the greatest anxiety amongst the entire household, of which he principal member much so that it said they too became affected. Wr French, Ballygan, county Galway, whom they previously knew, was sent for, and on his arrival was met by the wurdered man, who shook him warmly by the hand, but refused to submit to any medical treatment, stating it was the priest he wanted and not the doctor. The priest ww again sent for, and succeeded in pacifying the unfortunate man, who soon afterwards returned to his work, and the family generally seemed much reconciled. On Thursday no unusual occurrence took place, but on Friday deceased left the house, and was seen by several people of the district, including the curate of the parish, with whom he had a conversation shortly before two o'clock, and immediately which was joined in the Rosary, recited in the kitchen. During prayers, however, he suddenly leaped up and, with- out fell on his father, whom he attacked yiolently. A sudden frenzy seemed to instantly take possession of the whole household. Froma statement made to the police, it would ‘seem that some of the family rushed with uncon- trollable fury at the man, hurried him into the bedroom, and with such as were at hand the terrible related above took place within a father, mother, and few sister then left the house, and minutes. that of a neighbour, who refused admission to them. y, however, forced the window then opened tothem and they were admitted, they would m. on the went to About Michael and in- the police barrack at Doyle that his brother ied him to the house, where they found the body, the head and shirt , brother, and sister then the house, which afforded many evi dences of the of the severalarticles iture en murdered workshop were scattéred about the The entire party were and conveyed In ly to the questions asked them, the were in the house on night, said that the family was able, and very religious. They. farm about 50 acres of land, in live stock. is needless to add the greatest local exci the names of the The follo John in custed Cunnirgham (! Canningham (sister) 

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002093/18960309/041/0004
Dublin Evening Telegraph - Monday 09 March 1896

Also in: https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000056/18960309/022/0005 Freeman's Journal - Monday 09 March 1896

OCCURRENCE IN COUNTY Alleged Shocking Murder. TA Whole Family Arrested—Affray with the Police. Kos.aamas. Saturday. The country for miles around hers woo shocked en the nee. being spread wen a sup' posed family murder of a brutal nature bad been perpetrated last night at Lieaphelim, six miles from here. It appears that Jame. Cunningham. who ass a shoemaker and artificial manure dealer, lived with his father, three brothers, and a Meter in a ory comfortable dwelling, and was remarked to be somewhat demented duriug the past week, no was evidenced by his swamis.' visits to a neighbouring " fort," called " The fairies' fort." The inhabitant. of that part of the country are extremely super• etitious, and lest night a number of them. ineluding James Cunningham, were under the impression that evil spirits" were hovering mead their dwelling. They, having consuited, all retired to their respective homes, but refused to lie down to Sloop. The Cunningham. imagined they heard wheal in their house, and also sat up, saying they would not retire to bed till the neck would crow." At about twelve o'clock the whole family knelt down to repeat the Rosary, and during this pious work James, it is stated, jumped up, caught his father by the throat, and threw him to the ground. The members of the family went to the assistance of the old man, but Jame. being a man of extraordinary physique, weighing 17 stone, played havoc with them. The screams attracted the neighbours, and it is stated that several Mei rushed into the house, when a general *vice ensued. It is alleged that every instrument in the place was requisitioned to subdue the powerful maniac, who was making such desperate attempts on the lives of them.... and who eventually ran through every portion of the house until he got into► room off die kitchen, when it is supposed he was done to death. The family than left the corp.ae tole occupant, and remained with neigliboure till morning, when a brother of deeeased reported she matter to she police, who immediately hur-1 Med to the house end Muni ohs body of James Cunningham lying es she floor, his battered-in head resting against the leg of a table. The police found several isetrumeiods with portions of she heir and coin deceased attached. The furniture wrie upset end the general aspect of the house convoyed toe impression that a dee. perste struggle most lave ensued. After making inquiries the Cinstabulary arrested the father, three brothers, and three neighbours on a charge of having murdered James Cunningham. Athlone, Sunday Night. The primness in the Itoeconiereon murder case— James, Bichsel, John, Liszie, and William Cunningham-arrived here tfiis evening, and on their wry to the barrack were followed by a large tined who jeered. The men were handcuffed and tied in the brakes, and presented a frightful appearance. At two o'clock this morning they were under the impr.sion that spirits inhabited the eell in Lecarrow Barracks, sad the five men, being of powerful strength, forced the lock of the gate and charged at the police in the dayroom. There were ordy six police present— , Sergeant Doyle, and Constables O'Brien, Callaghan, /Kelly, Dalton, arid Duggan --and a fierce struggle ensued between them and tee prisoners. Batons were drawn, and after a considerable quantity of blood had been shed the police succeeded in throwini the men, bendorffing thaw and tying their logs with ropes. In this condition they arrived sere this evening, Moir faces bearing large wounds, while the traces of blood were still vimbleon Main. The father of deceased is so disabled that it was xeceseary to convey him here &covered carriage. The female prisoner is suffering much from fright, and wee amended by Dr Dobbs. The affair •has shocked the whole counter side, and all are surprised at the entertain: meet of the witchcraft idea in their midst. On Friday the deceased newt for the liter Father &lunged', P P, St Jeshn'e, and requested Ito be annointod; but, seeing the healthy condition of the man, Father Mulleady considered him as labouring under some hallucination. later on in dos day went to the church, accompanied by he brother, to find she brother Michael, and prayed therefor tome time. Later information states than sip prisoner., including MO female, are rearing ii the barracks, and it require. a largo guard te control them. The coroner, Mr J J Burke, I P, bes been wired for to Ballinlough. 

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001384/18960309/133/0005
Dublin Daily Express - Monday 09 March 1896

A FAVILY GO Vth team n the shoot Athlone, Saturday sented A tragedy of a uost revolting cl son at unhappily, in every detail Was attended with results so distressing character as to mark it as one of t » Lieu- dreadful ever recorded in the Coun to the common, occurred last mght in the luther of Lecarrow, about 12 miles from and bordering ov Galway and Ros | Lord Rumour of the murder reached reneral about three o'clock on Saturday af and official was receive at the police headquarters shortly after, | st Clair Ruthven aud Captain to the RK M, immediately proceeded to tl tressed which is far removed frow the railw only acceasible by car, after sume tv lunster drive. The house in which the place took place is a substantial one-stor | given ing, and around it was assembled th le, and ing a small knot of people and alating | police constables. The kitchen and ven the are on the first floor, and divided by wall and door. In the bedroom wi atulate the murdered mau lying partly ov t Queen in a dreadful condition. His 1 which hacked in such a as w be al revugnisable, The upper lip and ust all portion of the chin were co team smashed. His eyes were protrud highly under them were several seve 1 have wounds, while his breast and were exposed, revealed is shot gashes, and his hands we mation rated in numerous places. TI curate, of the did no portions body ellence farther marks of violence. The st ciated with this dreadful occurres ry you the most painful character, and al three motive for the brutal murder rende in the more inexplicable, except, ind with a statement that the entire family hi of 740 forsome days suffering from mental. usiliers All the persons identified with the nd un- are members of one family (inclu hpston, murdered tan), named Cunninghar kable live in a village, or rather hamlet an five Lesphelan, in which there are ins er than houses, occupted by people of the sar n tuade and relatives. They are of the cts are class, in a fairly well-to-do condit te sure | the deceased, James Cunningham, « lin the house the trade of boot ere im maker. Nothing unusual was notic hole of until abvut a fortnight a 1 regi- the unfortunate man returned from this in a strangely excited state, thus dra attention of bis father and brothers toy for The police became aware of the ned in for some days past more t ich the tommry attention to the district, bu it. their surveillance within the past w Monday last one of the decease ary for brothers called at the Presbytery s desir- formed the priest of his strange de courate He was visited by the curate, and s im pos- derive mach consolation from his \ in it his work during that ities of suceeedipg days Ou Wednesda, yerance ever, a relapse set in, the unt the man hecame entireic demented and ' been happy state excited the greatest | to-day atungst the entire housebuld, of | metuber — 4 retthey | was the principal “xpress | su that it is said they tuo ra this Dr Freneb, Ballygan Galway, whom they k sent for, and on lis arrival was m y glad, honour murdered man, whe shuok hime we the band, but refused te submi tedical treatinc ni, stating it wast t long ! he wanted and not the doctor. 1 we sent and fought ayain for, t t y great in pacifying he unfortunate man, mM very | afterwards returned tu his work, Lord ‘family generally seemed 4 recon nt aud | Thursday pe uousual occurrence te xe here } but on Friday deceased lett the hu pon the was seen by several peuple of the 1 oo = | including the curate of the parist lleney, who he had a une erely | beture two ocluck, and istin- in the whic | recited in the kitchen. During | ss and | he suddenly leaped up anc out provecation, fell on his father, you for attacked A sudden wo con- seeued ty instantly take possession whole From a statemen hobour deeply | tu the police. and which will be read mented Inquest to-day, wv would seeu elf to sume of the family rushed = with at the man, re that | trullable furs Uw we him juto the and with estion. weapons as were at hand the k that lace v tragedy related above half of j few minutes. The father, | sister then left the house, and proce r your that of a ne nbour, whe refused ad 1 am to them. Th however, forced the guests open, thus gaining rance by the 1 he front door serve was then opened | and they were admitted, stating the. ather’s not remain in their own giment About 9am. on the following u (Saturday), Michael enter- the police barrack at Lecarron, hevn in formed Set eant Doyle that his was dead. he police immediately e team panied Lim to the house, where the in the the body, the head and shirt cover blood. The father, brother, and sis entered the house, which afforded m dences of the struggle of the severalarticles of furniture being bro | sell by steel implements taken from the w irniture inan’s workshop were scattered ab ts, the place. The endire party were place a colt, arrest. apd conveyed tu the police tails of In reply to the questions asked th vertise- the he prisoners, who were in Saturday night, said that the fa considered industrious, able. and verv religious. Thev about 30 acres of land, and deal con: Exhi- in live stock. It is needless to emiere vecurrence has created the great ire to excitement. street. The following are the names of th n the in custody p rick Cunningham vut of John and Mich “i Cunningham (t and | Bridget Cunninelham (siete: 

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000433/18960310/061/0004
Dublin Evening Mail - Tuesday 10 March 1896

THE MAD ROSCOMM FAMILY. FURIOUS FIGHT IN THE PO! CRLL. Athlone, Nught. The shocking tragedy of Lasphelan has developed a new phase. At 1.30 o'clock on Sunday morniag the whole family, namely, the father, three sons, and a daughter, who were confined to the lock-up in Lecarrow Potice Barracks, became frantic, and in a moment of ungovernable fury, and while under the hallucination that one of the bvothers (Patrick) was the devil, the rest attacked him violently, expressing their determination to deal with him in the same manner as the murdered man. The poor fellow was terribly beaten, and when the ice rushed into the lock-up the scene was one of indescribable fury. A fight lasting for an hour and a half ensued, after which time the lock-up was literally covered with blood. ‘The police eventually succeeded in overpowering the prisoners, and then the unfortunate family became more or less pacified. As soon as the three brothers were tightly strapped and handcuffed, and removed to the police headquarters in Athlone. All Sunday and during the night they were in a very agitated state, and the time passed away in shouting and mumbling prayers “ to drive away the fairies.” This morning an inquest was opened at Lisphelan by Mr. Coroner Bourke. District Inspector Shaw, representing the Divisional Commissioner, on leave, and District Inspector Pearson watched ease on behalf of the Crown. Mr W. P. Kelly, solicitor, A was for the next of kin. Sergeant Doyle, Lecarrow pulice station, deposed to having heard on Saturday morn- ing from a brother of the deceased of the murder. He came to Lisphelan with some constables and found the body. Patrick Cunningham said the deceased attacked them and they had to do away with him. The kitchen of the house was very much disarranged. There was no live person in the house, but some people came in afterwards, The murdered man was terribly battered, his chin was cut away, his teeth broken, and other injuries apparent on the The father said that when they were body. at the Rosary ” the previous night deceased got upand caught him by the throat. His other sons came to separate them, and the deceased attacked them. They left him dead, and the old man said he heard a voice from the loft say “look out for yourself now. brought to the  barrac' the accused assaulted the police several times. They were very violent, and could not be worse; they had to tie them with ropes. They were talking about devils and fairies. Wm. Cunningham, Lesphelan, said the deceased for some time was “innocent.” On the night of the murder, after witness, who was a neighbour, had gone to bed, the ly of the deceased came to his house, asked tw be let in, for God’s sake. He refused, and they burst in the They said to him, “ Keep up your courage. We have him killed ; there is no fear of you. There is no danger now.” They ultimately got into his house, and said their own was filled with thousands of deyils ; that they were on the loft and outside the door, that only forall the holy water they shook around them they would sweep them all inno time. They then began to say the In Rosary and make the sign of the cross. the morning they went and informed the priest, and would not eater the house until he came. Bernard gave similar evi- dence. Drs and Dobbs gave medical evi- and teeth were broken of the murde: dence. They said that the nose, jaws, sk vd and death was due to shock caused by the man. He had fatty generation of the heart, wounds, Deceased must have got terrible The jury returned an open 


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001648/18960310/067/0005
Cork Constitution - Tuesday 10 March 1896

THE BELIEF IN FAIRIES. The country for miles around Roscommon was shocked the news being spread that supposed family murder of brutal nature bad been perpetrated appears that James Cunningham, who was shoemaker and artificial manure dealer. lived with his father, three brothers, and sister in very comfortable dwelling, anil was remarked to somewhat demented during the past week, was evidenced his occasional visits to a neighbouring “fori,” called “The Fairies’ Fort.” The inhabitants that part of the country are extremely superstitious, and on Friday night number them, including James Cunningham, were under tbe impression that “evil .spirits” were hovering round their dwellings. They, having consulted, all retired to their respective homes, but refused lie down sleep. The Cunninghams imagined they heard noises in their house, and also sat up, saying they would not retire to bed till the “cock would crow.” about twelve o’clock the whole family knelt down to repeat the Rosary, and during this pious work James, it is stated, jumped up, caught his father by the throat and threw him to the ground. The members of the family went the assistance of the old man, but James being a man of extraordinary physique, weighing seventeen stone, played havoc with them. The screams attracted the neighbours, and it is stated that several men rushed into the house, when a general melee ensued. It is alleged that every instrument the place was requisitioned subdue tbe powerful maniac, who was making such desperate attempts the lives of the others, and who eventually ran through every portion of the house until he got into room off the kitchen, where it supposed he was done death. The family then left the corpse as sole occupant, and remained with neighbours till morning, when a brother of deceased reported the matter the police, who immediately hurried to the house and found the body of Janies Cunningham lying on the floor, his battered-in bead resting against the leg a table. The police found several instruments with portions of the hair and skin of deceased attached. The furniture was upset and tbe general aspect of tbe house conveyed the impression that desperate struggle must have ensued. After making inquiries the Constabulary arrested the father, three brothers, and three neighbours on achargeof having murdered James Cunningham. An Athlonc correspondent says :—The prisoners in the Koscommon murder case—James, Michael, John, Lizzie, and William Cunningham—arrived here this evening, and on their way to the barrack were followed by large crowd who jeered.. The men were handcuffed and tied in the brakes, and presented frightful appearance. At two o’clock this morning they were under the impression that spirits inhabited the cell in Lecarrow Barrack), and the five men, being powerful strength, forced the lock of the gate and charged at the police the dayroom. There were only six police present Sergeant Doyle, and Constables O’lkien, Callaghan, Kelly, Dalton, and Dugganand fierce struggle ensued between the and lire prisoners. Batons were drawn, and after a considerable quantity of blood had been shed the police succeeded in throwing the men, handcoifing them, and tying their legs with ropes. this condition they arrived here this evening, I heir faces bearing large wounds, while the traces of blood were still visible on them. The father of deceased is so disabled that it was necessary to convey him here in covered carriage. The female prisoner is suffering much from flight, and was attended Dobbs. The affair has shocked the whole country side, amt all are surprised the entertainment of the witchcraft idea their midst. Friday the deceased sent for the Kcv Father Mulleady, 1* I*, John’s, and requested to anointed ; but, seeing the healthy condition the man, Faiher Mulleady considered him as labouring under some hallucination. Later in the day he went to the chutch, accompanied by his brother, find the brother Michael, and prayed there for some time. Later information states that prisoners, including one female, are roaring the barracks, and it requires a large guard to control them. The coroner, J Burke, J I*, has been wired for Ballinlough. An Athlone correspondent telegraphs that an inquest was held yesterday Lecarrow by Burke, to oner, county Roscommon the body of James Cunningham, alleged to have been killed his father and brothers balunlay morning. The police evidence showed that the death had been reported by Fat Cunningham, brother the deceased. Me stated that his brother was little astray,” and had to Iks done away with. The condition of the body showed several wounds the face, evidently inflicted a -harp instrument. The father told the police that the deceased had seized him by the throat, and in effecting his to-cne, other sot!-, had beaten James severely with their fists. During the struggle mysterious voice was heard calling from neighbouring !ofr, Now, take care of yourself. custody Cunningham had kept up shouting ptayers and incantations. William Cunningham, neighbour, deposed" that the prisoners had burst open his door, and stated they were going stay all night. They had killed him (meaning deceased), and had had narrow escape; their house was filled with devil.-, atnl fairies whom they felt cracking the door, and had to hunt them with holy water. The Cunninghams weie sober, indastiioos people The jury found that the deceased killed his father and brothers selfdefence.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000919/18960312/076/0005
South Wales Daily News - Thursday 12 March 1896

ATHLONE MURDER.

TERRIBLE SCENE IN TULLAMORE GAOL.

DEMONIAC FRENZY OF THE PRISONERS.

Tuilamore Gaol, in which the four men named Cunningham are confined in connection with the murder near Athlone, on Wednesday night witnessed a terrible scene. The men became seized with frenzy, and their shrieks resounded through the building. They also dashed themselves about the cells, uttering wild adjurations to be delivered from the fairies and devils surrounding them. A large staff of warders was summoned, and the prison surgeon had to be sent for. On entering one of the cells the doctor was violently attacked, and was only rescued with difficulty. All the prisoners had ultimately to be strapped down, but they continued to vociferate with unabated violence. The paroxysm lasted through the night, and the surgeon had to call in outside medical assistance. There appears to be no doubt that three of the prisoners are violent maniacs, and the action of the Athlone magistrates in sending them to gaol instead of to a lunatic asylum is regarded as extraordinary.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001842/18960323/059/0003
Eastern Evening News - Monday 23 March 1896

THE CUNNINGHAM FAMILY.

A Tullomore correspondent telegraphs that Dr. Stewart Woodhonse, Medical-officer of the Prisons Board, together with Dr. Kennedy, gaol surgeon, and Dr. Moorhead, on Saturday visited the Cunningham family, who are charged with the murder of a relation whom they alleged was "possessed of fairies," and as a result one of the accused was pronounced to be a dangerous lunatic, and was removed to Maryborough Lunatic Asylum. The other prisoners, the father and two sons, are improving in health, although the sons particularly are physically weak and prostrate, and it will be some time before they will be fit to undergo a magisterial examination.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003039/18960324/190/0003
Northern Guardian (Hartlepool) - Tuesday 24 March 1896

LATEST NEWS. (BY TELEGRAPH THIS DAY.). THE ROSCOMMON MURDER. Cunningham, the alleged lunatic in custody charged with the Roscommon murder, has been discovered to be suffering from a broken arm.

