# Cunning Men and Cunning Women of the Forest

TO DO



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002067/18681112/066/0004
Ross Gazette - Thursday 12 November 1868

THE CUNNING MAN AND THE DONKEY.—It will hardly be credited that in this enlightened age such an amount of ignorance prevails In our immediate neighbourhood as the facts we are about to narrate will demonstrate. A fortnight ago, a man living about two miles from Mitcheldean lost a donkey, and after searching in vain for it, he heard of a certain cunning man, living over at "Covutzide" (Berry Hill, near Coleford), which all-potent personage, he was informed, could not only tell him of Noddy's whereabouts, but also restore the animal to his owner. The poor man, thinking this was just the thing he wanted, was simple enough, after working for many a weary hour in the pit, to wend his way over to the residence of this "mighty oracle," a distance of about six miles, and, having been admitted into his august presence, "stated his case." After a most solemn pause, such as was consistent with the dignity of his "profession", the oracle replied that he could tell who had the donkey! The poor man's face brightened up at this intelligence, doubtless anticipating a speedy re-union with his long-ear'd friend, who, having been the beloved companion of his youth, a sympathetic relationship had grown up between them, and we may say, in the words of the "poet," in his inimitable parody on "old dog Tray,"

"They were more like brothers than we care for to say."

But alas for all human hopes! our friend soon discovered that the cunning man must have been speaking in the *past* and not the *present* tense, for If he knew who (once) had the donkey, he did not vouchsafe on this occasion to say *who had got it now*. That information must be deferred to a future visit. So after drawing a fee (simple) of 2s. from the hard earnings of his "client," he dismissed him with the following directions:— "Go home at once! Get a piece of white goner, four inches sqare, prick it with a pin all over so thickly as not to allow another hole being made in it; hang it up by the side of the fire-place, and by no means allow a child to touch it, for if you do, *all will be useless*. Let it remain three days, meanwhile throw salt in the fire at intervals during the time, and at three days end, come again." Strange to say, these injunctions were carried out to the letter. On the second visit, the cunning man exclaimed, "Your donkey is at this moment in the hands of some gipsies; they are proceeding towards Gloucester: "tallygraph" at once for the police to stop them; if they get over the bridge, I can do no more for you, as the water will be between us. The poor man demurred, stating he had no money nor means to "tallygraph," but he had a pair of good legs, and he would start off in pursuit. This he actually did, after "feeing" his profound "adviser," but we need hardly say his journey was fruitless. No donkey did he see — unless indeed a mirror was presented to him. Footsore and dispirited, he returned to his house, and on the following day, while walking in the immediate vicinity of his own residence, he came upon his donkey dead in a ditch. And this circumstance can be clearly and easily explained. The poor animal had been turned out to graze in the forest with its legs closely fettered. It had either lain down or fallen in the ditch, but was not able to rise, owing to the fetters, and there died. When found, it appeared to have been dead some days. We have had these statements from a most respectable person, who is fully acquainted with the case, and can vouch for its veracity.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002067/18690527/063/0004
Ross Gazette - Thursday 27 May 1869

MITCHELDEAN

The Cunning Man Again

One would hardly credit, in this (so-called) enlightened age, the amount of ignorance and superstition that still exists even in our own immediate neighbourhood; but the following ludicrous story has been sent us, the truth of which can be vouched for. A man residing near Mitcheldean got into debt at the shop of Mrs. Barnard, of the Bridge, Shapidge, and failing to pay up, Mrs. B. entered the case in the County Court, at Newnham. As the day for trial drew nigh, the debtor became anxious, and, after turning over many plans in his head to get out of it, he hit on the bright idea of taking a walk over to "Covut Zide" to the cunning man, and getting him to bewitch Mrs. B., so as to prevent her attendance at court on the court day. Arrived there, the noted wizard took the case in hand, gave him some stuff like birdlime (only dirtier in colour) and told his silly dupe to make all speed back to Mrs. B.'s, and if he could not prevail on her to take the stuff, he was to buy a pennyworth of brimstone from her shop, and, holding the two ingredients in his hand, he was to breathe on Mrs. B. This, he said, would have the effect of keeping her at home on the court day. This tale, we suppose, the stupid man believed, for in an incredibly short space of time, he arrived in Mrs. B.'s garden, a distance of nine miles, almost breathless and exhausted. The speed at which he had travelled, may be best gathered from his own words, viz., "I a nevr vund o' my vit all along the road till I lit clean plump in these very gardin." We must therefore suppose that his cunning friend lent him a pair of wings, and that he came the "way the crow flies." What a splendid mark for a sportsman! Our riflemen might have had a shy at him if they had been out that evening, supposing him to be a "great pelican of the wilderness"; but now, how does our hero succeed with his nostrum? Why, when he "lit" in the garden, he "lit" upon Mr. B. instead of Mrs. B.; whereupon he requested the favour of Mr. B.'s partaking of a little of the cunning man's mixture. Mr. B. shook his head, smiled, and said, "It looks too much like mouldy cow-dung for me." But the man replied with all seriousness, "You are bewitched, and this will cure you." However, it was "no go," and meeting with the same ill luck in his brimstone experiment on Mrs. B., he went his way. On court day, Mrs. B. also went her way, and that was to Newnham, where she obtained judgment from his Honour for the debt and costs; and from what we hear,

Mrs. B. has a hearty good laugh  
When she thinks of this wonderful trick;  
But she's not to be taken by chaff,  
And the cunning man's birdlime *won't stick*.

Had simpleton paid off the debt  
Long stack in his creditor's "gizzard,"  
He'd have saved him a thorough good sweat,  
Which he got running after the wizard.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002067/18691223/076/0004
Ross Gazette - Thursday 23 December 1869

The Cunning Man Again

To the Editor of the Ross Gazette.

Dear Sir,— When I was a boy I used to hear of certain apples called "Tewkesbury wheedles," but I never until a few days ago beard of Tewkesbury simpletons. Would it be believed that on Saturday morning last two young men called on me to inquire the way to Coleford, stating they bad that morning walked from Pendock, near Tewkesbury, through pouring rain, having been informed that near Coleford there lived a "cunning man," who could tell them who stole their tools? They were drainers, and had put several tools— shovel, pick, foot iron, &c.—at the door of a public-house while they had a pint of beer, during which time the tools were stolen. I told them my opinion of the foolishness of their expedition, when they determined to make the best of their way home again, when they would have walked about 40 miles on their fool's errand.

Mitcheldean. ANTI-HUMBUG.

---

Prestoin Wynee, 3 or 4 miles north-east of Hereford

Turning a key eg https://www.mysteriousbritain.co.uk/folklore/a-case-of-turning-the-key-divination-1697/

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276914068_The_Bible_in_British_Folklore
The Bible in British Folklore
March 2008Postscripts The Journal of Sacred Texts and Contemporary Worlds 2(2):241-272
DOI:10.1558/post.v2i2.241



https://archive.org/details/NotesOnTheFolk-loreOfTheNorthernCountiesOfEnglandAndTheBorders/page/n253/mode/2up
Notes on the folk-lore of the northern counties of England and the borders
by Henderson, William

Publication date 1879
pp234-6

[Coskiomancy]

We pass now to some Tweedside stories of recovery of property by the aid of local superstition. The following anecdote is recorded by the Kev. E. 0. Bromfield, of Sprouston, and I am glad to give it in his own words : —

" Some time since, when calling at the house of one of my oldest parishioners, who had been a handloom weaver, he fell to speak of other days; and, amongst other things, he told me of the disappearance, some years back, on a fine summer's evening, of a w T eb of linen which had been laid to bleach by the riverside at the foot of the glebe. The fishermen, it seems, were burning the water in the Skerry^ and the man who had charge of the web went off to see the salmon ' leistered/ and on his return the web was gone. Of course there was a sensation. The story was soon in everybody's mouth, with abundant suspicions of as many persons as there were yards in the web of linen.

" The web belonged to a very important personage, no less than the howdie, or old village midwife, who was not disposed to sit down quietly under her loss. So she called in the aid of a Wise-man from Leetholm^ and next day told her friend the weaver, my informant, that she had found the thief, for the Wiseman had turned the key. The weaver being anxious to see something of diablerie, the howdie brought the Wise-man to his house; and, the door being locked on all within (four in number), the magician proceeded as follows. He took a small key and

attached it to a string, which he tied into the family Bible in a particular place, leaving the key hanging out Next he read two chapters from the Bible, one of which was the history of Saul and the witch of Endor ; he then directed the howdie and another person to support the key between them, on the tips of their forefingers, and in that attitude the former was told to repeat the „ names of all the suspected parties.

" Many persons were named, but the key still hung between the fingers, when the Wise-man cried out, ' "Why don't you say Jock Wilson?' This was accordingly done, and immediately the key dropped, L e. turned off the finger-ends. So the news spread far and wide that the thief was discovered, for the key had been turned and Jock Wilson was the man ! He proved, however, not to be the man to stand such imputations, and, being without doubt an honest fellow, he declared ' he wud'na be made a thief by the deevil.' So he went to consult a lawyer, but after many long discussions the matter died away ; and my authority, the weaver, says it was believed that the lawyer was bribed, ' for he aye likit a dram.' "

Now here we have something very like an old superstition, which dates at least from the time of Theocritus (b.c. 282). Potter, in his Grecian Antiquities, 1 says that the Greeks called it coskiomancy, and practised it for the discovery of thieves and other suspected persons. . They tied a thread to the sieve, by which it was upheld, or else placed under it a pair of shears, which they held up by two fingers; then they prayed to the gods for assistance, after which they repeated the names of the persons under suspicion ; and he or she at whose name the sieve moved was thought to have committed the offence. Such was the rite resorted to in pagan Greece. Mr. Kelly finds the key to it in the marvellous powers with which the sieve was invested in days of yore through its connection with rainclouds. Throughout the Greek and Teutonic mythology the sieve may be seen in the hand of cloud-gods and cloud-goddesses, who employed it in watering the earth. Hence it became a sacred implement, and the Greeks, Eomans, Germans, and Slavs used it alike in divi-

1 Vol. i. p. 52.

nations and solemn ordeals. Cornelius Agrippa speaks of it as thus employed, and in Hudibras we find mention of—

The oracle of sieve and shears, That turns as certain as the spheres.

There is a record of its use in the North of England in the 16th century. The private book of Dr. Swift, who was VicarGeneral and official Principal of the diocese of Durham from 1561 to 1577, contains " A confession to be made by Allice Swan, wife of Eobert Swan, in S. Nicole's church at Newcastle* for turning the ridle and shears, with certen others, after the minister upon Sonday after the sermon."

The practice has descended in Germany almost to our own day. It is thus carried on in Mecklenburg. They take a sieve that has been inherited from relations, lay it on the rim, open a pair of inherited scissors, and stick the points so deep into the rim of the sieve that it may be supported by them. Two persons then, of opposite sexes, go with the sieve into a perfectly dark place, hold the middle finger of the right hand under the ring of the scissors, and so raise up the sieve. One then inquires, " In the name, &c. I ask of thee; tell me truly, has Hans, Fritz, Peter, done it?" On naming the guilty one, the ring slides off, the sieve falls to the ground, and the thief is detected. 1

In the passage above cited, from Potter's Grecian Antiquities, he says that the vulgar in many parts of England have an abominable practice of using a riddle and a pair of shears in divination. A book and key, however, appear commonly to have superseded the sieve and shears in this country. When Eeginald Scott speaks of this species of divination (in his Discovery of Witchcraft, a.d. 1599), it is with a Psalter and a key; and in a case brought before the Thames Police, in 1832, the Bible was used. One Mr. White, it seems, had lost some property, and agreed with the neighbours to resort to the Bible and key in discovery of the thief. They placed the street-door key on the fiftieth Psalm, closed the volume, and fastened it tightly with a string. The Bible and key were then suspended to a nail, and the name of Mrs. Blucher (the person on whom suspicion had 1 Thorpe's Mythology, vol. iii. p. 161.

allen) was repeated three times by one of the women, while another recited these lines: —

If it turn to thee, Thou art the thief, and we are all free.

The key then turned, or was thought to do so, and Mrs. Blucher was proclaimed to be the thief; on which she went into Mrs White's house and beat her, and was finally brought before the police-court on a charge of assault.

A similar case occurred not long ago on board a collier off Southampton, in which the key was placed on the 1st chapter of Ruth. The Bible fell at the mention of a certain lad's name, and on this evidence alone he was brought before the bench of magistrates on a charge of theft. The bench of course discharged him.

Again, soon after the reconstruction of the Whitby and Pickering branch of the North Eastern Railway, a lady lost her boa, a large old-fashioned one, on Fenbog, near the line. Having ascertained that only one person had been seen near the spot that day she accused him of finding and keeping her boa, in spite of his respectable position as an inspector on the line and his unblemished character. He denied the charge, so she consulted the riddle and shears and he was found guilty. The oracle swayed public opinion so completely that he found himself obliged to give up his situation and leave the place. Some months later, however, he was unexpectedly cleared. A railway official spied a hairy monster floating in a little stream .close to the line, called for help, and collected some men with forks and other implements, who soon brought to land the lost boa. While as recently as December 27, 1878, in a trial before the borough court of Ludlow, it transpired that "the Bible and key" had been appealed to for the discovery of a thief, and in the following way : The parties concerned touched the ends of their five fingers to form a cross over the open Bible, on which the key was laid, and the words, " Where thou goest I will go," &c. were uttered. Then certain names were repeated, and when the name was mentioned of the person who stole the articles the

key began (it was said) to jerk about, and no power could keep it still.

A book and key are used, I believe, in a somewhat similar way by modern mesmerisers, to test the strength of will. If two persons thus hold them on the tips of their forefingers the key will turn, they say, to the one who possesses the strongest will.

--

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18790110/012/0003
Morning Post - Friday 10 January 1879
amd also in:

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000331/18790116/043/0006
Cornishman - Thursday 16 January 1879

SUPERSTITION IN SHROPSHIRE. — A remarkable case of credulity wis heard on Tuesday at the Ludlow Borough Police-court. Mary A.Collier was summoned under the local by laws fer using abusive language to Elizabeth Oliver. Both parties, it transpired, live in Lower Goulford, and a sheet having been lost off a garden line, with a view to discover the thief, the superstitious praotice of "turning the key and the Bible" was resorted to. Complainant said Collier met her in the street and said the Bible had been turned down for Jones's-yard, Martha Cad's-yard, and Burnsnall's-yard, and when Mrs. Oliver's name was mentioned "the Bible fled out of their hands." The Bible was then turned to see if the sheet was stolen during the day or night, and Mrs. Collier then called her "a ———— daylight thief." Mrs. Collier informed the Court that the key turned for Mrs. Oliver and no one else, the words in the Bible "were for her." Mrs. Oliver said the sheet had been found under the snow. A witness corroborated Mrs. Oliver, but the statement as to bad language was nor confirmed.—The bench dismissed the case, and said such gross superstition was more like a relic of the past, and they would not have believed such a thing existed in this advanced age.

As a safe, permanent and warranted cure for Pimples, Scrofula, Scurvy, Bad Legs, Skin and Blood Diseases, and Sores of all kinds, we can eith confidence recommend CLARK'S WORLD-FAMED BLOOD MIXTURE. Sold by Chemists everywhere.

WIdely reported, eg under heading "THE KEY AND THE BIBLE. GROSS SUPERSTITION IN SHROPSHIRE" in
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000919/18790109/099/0004
South Wales Daily News - Thursday 09 January 1879

Chester Courant - Wednesday 15 January 1879

TURNING THE KEY ON THE BIBLE.—At the borough sessions held at Ludlow on Wednesday, a novel form of superstition cropped up in a charge of using abusive language, preferred against Mary Ann Collier by her neighbour Elizabeth Oliver. From the evidence of the prosecutrix, it seems that on the 27th ult. she met the defendant and said that it was a bad job for Mrs. Martha Cad that she had lost her sheet, when the defendant said that they had "turned the key on the Bible," and discovered that prosecutrix had taken the sheet, and she was a ————— daylight thief.— The Bench asked what was meant by "turning the key on the Bible," when it was explained that after Mrs. Cad missed the sheet she and some of her friends obtained a Bible and key, and went to the backyards of different houses and performed the following ceremony. The Bible was opened, and the woman who lost the sheet crossed her two forefingers over it, the key was balanced on the forefingers, the name of the suspected party living in the house was mentioned, and the 16th verse of the 1st chapter of Ruth, commencing at "Whither thou goest I will go," was repeated. If the key turned the person whose name was mentioned was the thief. The key did not turn until they arrived at the backyard of the prosecutrix, but there it turned at the name of Mrs. Oliver. The incantation was then proceeded with to ascertain whether the sheet was stolen at night or by daylight, and the result the party was satisifed it was stolen by daylight. The Magistrates expressed astonishment at the credulity of the defendant and the witnesses examined, but they dismissed the charge against the defendant.



https://archive.org/details/byegonesrelating1882unse/page/194/mode/2up?q=%22bible+and+key%22
Bye-gones, relating to Wales and the border counties. [January 2nd, 1878-December 24th, 1879]
Publication date 1879

p194 Feb. 1893

An instance of the survival of an antiquated superstition came before the Ludlow magistrates last week. A woman was brought up on a charge of using abusive language towards another woman. It appeared that the defendant’s daughter died, and that the complainant went to assist in laying out the body. A watch, which had been hanging at the head of the bed, disappeared, and the complainant was accused of stealing it by defendant, who said that "she had turned the key on the Bible ten times, and it turned to complainant’s name." A key, according to the once popular superstition, was believed to turn at the mention of the guilty person’s name, when placed inside the Bible so as to be upon the 16th and 17th verses of the first chapter of Ruth.

https://archive.org/details/shropshirefolkl00burngoog/page/n196/mode/2up
Shropshire Folk-lore: A Sheaf of Gleanings
by Georgina Frederica Jackson, Charlotte Sophia. Burne

Publication date 1883

Vol. 1 (of three)

pp172-4

'The Bible and Key' says our friend and correspondent Mrs. N————, writing in 1871 from a village in Corve Dale, 'has come to be chiefly used for detecting dishonest servants or children in farmhouses, and in this is very useful. The culprit generally confesses at once, and receives some slight punishment, when all is well.' Not always, however, does the matter end so successfully. In December, 1878, one Mrs. Martha Cad, living in Ludlow, missed a sheet, and proceeded to 'turn the Key on the Bible' to discover who had stolen it. She and a party of friends went to the back-yards of several neighbours in succession, and at each they opened the Bible, the injured party crossed her forefingers over it, the key was balanced on the fingers, the name of the person living in the house was mentioned, and as Mrs. Cad (who should have done so) could not read, her neighbour, Mrs. Mary Ann Collier, repeated for her the sixteenth verse of the first chapter of Ruth ('Whither thou goest I will go,' etc.). The key remained motionless till they reached the yard belonging to Mrs. Elizabeth Oliver, when as soon as her name was mentioned, they declared that both key and Bible turned completely out of their hands. They then tried whether the theft was committed by 'daylight or dark,' and the key turned at 'daylight.' On the 27th December Mrs. Collier met Mrs. Oliver, and took occasion to inform her, with 'nice derangement of epitaphs,' that she was 'a daylight thief.' Mrs. Oliver charged her at the Ludlow Borough Sessions on the 8th January, 1879, with using abusive language, and the whole story came out in Court, accompanied by a renewed wrangle between the pair, and a great display of interest on the part of many believers in the divination who were present, and one of whom, being called as a witness, averred that at the mention of a thief's name the key invariably begins to jerk about, so that 'no power can keep it still:' much to the astonishment of the Mayor and his colleagues, who dismissed the case. `[Chester Courant, 15 Jan., 1879. Ludlow Advertiser 11 Jan., 1879. The latter paper says that two persons must touch 'the ends of their five-fingers to form a cross over the Bible.' The cross would then be formed by the contact of the four middle-fingers. 'Five-fingers' seems to be a Corve Dale term for the hand, see 'Foxes or the Fi'-Fingers,' in Shropshire Word-Book,]`

Exactly the same thing has just happened again. A Mrs. Caroline Pardoe of Upper Gaolford, Ludlow, lately lost a watch from the room in which her daughter, recently dead, had lain ill, and suspected her neighbour, Ellen Wall, who had helped her to nurse the sick child, of having stolen it. So she 'turned the key on the Bible, and when Mrs. Wall's name was called, it fell to the ground ten times.' She then, in no measured terms, accused Mrs. Wall of the theft, and on February 13th, 1883, the latter charged her at the Ludlow Borough Sessions with having used abusive language to her on the preceding 27th January. Mrs. Pardoe, who gave the Bench the benefit of her opinions on the subject at great length, took out a cross-summons for the same offence against Mrs. Wall's son, for having retorted in his mother's cause, and the matter ended with the infliction of a shilling fine on both parties. `[Shropshire Guardian 17th Feb., 1883, and other local papers.]`

---


https://archive.org/details/shropshirefolkl00burngoog/page/n196/mode/2up



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001502/18790108/166/0010
Eddowes's Shrewsbury Journal - Wednesday 08 January 1879

LUDLOW

Borough Police Court. ... *Gross Superstition:* Mary Ann Collier, a widower, was oharged with indulging in abusive language to a Mrs. Jones, a neighbour. It appeared that a neighbour had missed a bed-sheet from a clothes-line, and Mrs. Collier was thereupon asked to read certain verse (from Ruth) in the Bible while the precious volume was held by means key on the tips of the fingers of four different women. The Bible turned on complainant’s name being mentioned, and Mrs. Collier thereupon accused her of being the ———— thief. The case was dismissed, the Mayor expressing his surprise that each gross superstition should exist in this, the enlightened 19th century.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18470529/035/0007
Hereford Times - Saturday 29 May 1847

PETTY SESSIONS. SHIRE-HALL, Monday ( Before the Rev. J. C. Bird, and E. B. Pateshall, Esq.)

Charge of Stealing a Box containing between £30 and £40. *Jas. Nicholls*, a respectable-looking youth, attired in a suit of black, and *Richard Roberts*, dressed in the garb in which he works, both the prisoners being brickmakers and lodging in prosecutor's house, were brought before the above magistrates, in the custody of Superintendent Dexter, charged with having on the evening of Friday, the 14th inst., stolen a box containing money to the amount of between £30 and £40 from the house of Mr. Rowlands, shopkeeper and carpenter, of the township of Tillington.— Mr. J. Gwillim, solicitor, appeared for prosecution; and Mr. E. Pritchard, solicitor, most ably defended the prisoners. Mr. C. Rowlands, the prosecutor, being first called Mr. Gwillim, deposed: I am a carpenter trade, and live in the township of Tillington; on Friday evening last, between the hours of six and ten o'clock, I lost a sum of money from my house; I do not exactly know how much I lost, but believe it to have been between thirty and forty pounds; I saw it safe at five o'clock on Friday morning; it was kept in a little chest made of wood; I tried the chest when I last saw it and found that it was quite secure; my wife saw it safe at six o'clock in the evening, at which time she put some money into it. [One of the magistrates inquired of the prosecutor if his wife were present, and told him that, unless she were, what she had told him could not be received as evidence.] —Prosecutor said his wife was home, as she had the shop and several children to attend to and could not well leave.— The Bench observed that she ought to have been present, and were about to remand the case, when Mr. Pritchard protested the unfairness of allowing the neglect of the prosecutor, in not bringing his wife, to operate against the liberty of his clients.—Mr. Pritchard then said that he had no objection to admit that the wife did see the box and the money safe at six o'clock on Friday evening; he was quite as anxious his friend, Mr. Gwillim, that the case should be fully investigated, feeling confident that there was nothing in it which would militate against his clients.] The examination of the prosecutor was then proceeded with: The box contained one £5 note of the city and county bank; the rest of the money was in gold and silver; was out all day at work and returned home at eight o'clock at night; was present when his wife first missed the box, which was about nine o'clock at night; no person had any business in the parlour, without the leave himself or wife; there was a road through the parlour from the kitchen to the shop, but did not allow his lodgers or any other person to go through unless he or his wife were present. Cross-examined by Mr. Edward Pritchard: Will you tell the magistrates how it was you came to suspect that the prisoners committed the robbery? The prosecutor returned no answer. Mr. Pritchard: Who turned the key in the Bible? Prosecutor, after considerable hesitation: I can't exactly tell you. —Mr. Pritchard: Remember, sir, you are on your oath.— Prosecutor: Well; I did see a man turn the key in the Bible, but I did not tell him to do it.—Mr. Pritchard: But I insist upon knowing who that man was.—Prosecutor: It was a young man who lodges with me.—Mr. Pritchard: What was his name? Prosecutor, very reluctantly: His name Nathan Lloyd.—Mr. Pritchard: Did he not tell you after he turned the key, that Roberts was the man who stole the money?— The prosecutor made no reply, and Mr. Pritchard emphatically repeated the question.— The prosecutor, after considerable hesitation, replied: I believe Nathan Lloyd said that, by what he could see, it was Roberts who had the money. Mr. Pritchard: Did you not, in consequence of what Nathan Lloyd told you, put a person to watch Roberts and Nicholls?—The prosecutor admitted that did so chiefly on that account, but partly from other circumstances which came to his knowledge. In answer to other questions put to him by the learned gentleman for the defence, the prosecutor said that Nathan Lloyd was the man whom he deputed to watch, and that he worked in the same brick-yard with the prisoners; Nathan Lloyd was his wife's brother, and remained about the brickyard watching the prisoners all day on the Saturday.—Cross examination continued: There were bark strippers at his house on Friday night; his brother in-law bad been with him to bark stripping, and accompanied him home; a person might go through the room in which he kept the money, into the shop; has not suffered any person to go though the room unless his wife or himself were present.—It appears that at Preston Wynne, in this county, lives a reputed conjuror or "cunning man," as the country people more generally term him, and though thej not expect him, like "the witch of Endor," to recal Samuel from the grave, yet they place implicit reliance in him that, for the consideration of a sum of money, he can restore any property which may have been stolen from them, and be able to give an accurate description of the thief, though he might have never seen him. Mr. Pritchard, in his further examination of prosecutor, elicited from him, that he had sent a messenger horseback to consult the "great magician" of Preston Wynn respecting the loss of his money. On this part of the story the prosecutor's mind seemed to be very treacherous; he would not, or could not, for a considerable length of time, recollect the name of the messenger he sent to the "wise man" of Preston Wynne; he knew it was not his brother-in-law, but could not recollect perfectly who it was; the messenger, however, saw the "cunning man," or the "knowing man." which the prosecutor was pleased call him; and the "knowing man" told the messenger that "it was a person who worked in a brick-yard who robbed the prosecutor; that the money when stolen was in a box; that the person who stole it took the box into a brick-yard and stamped upon it and broke it to pieces, and then hid the money in some clay in the brick-yard." The "knowing man," however, added that the money was now removed, but that it was not removed by the person who committed the robbery.— Mr. Pritchard: Was it not in consequence of the message from the "cunning man" that you caused Nicholls to be apprehended as well as Roberts?—The prosecutor hesitatingly acknowledged that it was principally on this account.—Re-examined by Mr. Gwillim: But you did not put any faith in what the conjuror told the messenger?—Prosecutor: Yes, but I did though; I have got great faith what the "knowing man" said, and think as what he said is true.—Mr. Gwillim: I am sorry you put any faith in him; I think he ought to be brought up before their worships.—Prosecutor, in answer to Mr. Gwillim: I never allow lodgers to pass through the room in which the money was kept, without myself or wife being present. —Mr. Pritchard: Does not Nathan Lloyd occasionally pass through the room?—Prosecutor: O yes; he is my brother-in-law.— Mr. Pritchard: Have you not seen Roberts go through the room before Friday evening last?—Prosecutor: Yes; in company with my wife.—Mr. Pritchard: Was there not a young woman in the parlour on Friday evening last? Prosecutor: I believe there was.—Mr. Bird, to the prosecutor: I wish, instead of meddling with that conjuror, you had gone at once Superintendent Dexter; he would have put you in a much better way of finding your money than the conjuror.—George Stevenson called by Mr. Gwillim: I do not know Roberts ; I do not know that I ever saw him before the present moment; I was in Mr. Rowland's house about a quarter to nine o'clock on Friday night last; I went there for the purpose of inquiring for Mr. Rowlands; I went through the shop into the parlour, and I saw some person there; when I went in, he went out, and through the kitchen doer into the yard, thence into the road, and towards the brick-yard; the person I saw had no hat on, but I do not know otherwise how he was dressed.—Mr. Pritchard: Then you were in the parlour?—Witness: Mrs. Rowlands told me to go in.—Examined by Mr. Gwillim: I saw two young girls in the shop at the time being served by Mrs. Rowlands; I know them perfectly well; their names are Smith; they are two sisters; I left the girls in the shop; I am quite sure that the man I saw leave the parlour was without a hat, and that he went in the direction of the brick-yard. —Mr. Pritchard: Did you fasten the door between the parlour and kitchen? —Witness: I pulled it to, but cannot say whether it fastened not. —Elizabeth Smith was then sworn: I am 13 years of age; I live at Tillington, and was at Mr. Christopher Rowlands' house about nine o'clock on the evening of Friday last; I saw Mr. Stevenson, the last witness, in the shop; Mrs. Rowlands was there also; I did not see any other person except Roberts, whom I saw in the turnpike-road; he overtook us after we left Mrs. Rowlands's; he was then coming from the direction of the prosecutor's house; he had no hat on; it was rather duskish; he passed us (me and my sister) quickly; I said "Good night, Mr. Roberts, you have not got your hat on;" he replied, "No;" I then asked if he had seen my old apron in the brick-yard; he said had not seen it to notice it; I work in the brick-yard occasionally and had left my apron there; he also works in the brick-yard, which was the reason I asked him the question; I saw the prisoner, Roberts, go through the gate into the brick-yard, and towards the kiln; there was no fire in the kiln at that time, or I should have noticed it.—This witness was cross-examined by Mr. Pritehard, but nothing material was adduced therefrom —Sarah Smith, a very intelligent child, a sister to the last witness and several years younger, was then called by Mr. Gwillim. In addition to the facts deposed to by her sister, she said that she was assisting her sister to carry a basket when the prisoner Roberts overtook them; they were carrying a basket between them; Roberts, when he passed, appeared as though he had something uuder his waistcoat; I was nearer to him than my sister was, as he passed on the side of the road nearest to me; I wanted to go back and tell Mrs. Rowlands that Roberts had been taking something out of her shop.—This being a new feature in the case, the elder sister was recalled, and after some hesitation and prevarication she confirmed her sister's statement, which had been given when she was out of the room.—The examination of the younger sister was then resumed. She said her sister would not let her go back to Mrs. Rowlands's on account of approaching darknees; she watched Roberts into the brickyard and saw him go into the shed; she saw him stooping down, but did not know whether he was removing tiles, or what he was doing; she afterwards saw him come out of the brickyard; he did not look near the same then; his waistcoat did not then seem buiged out.—Cross-examined by Mr. Pritchard: My sister, Elizabeth, was at Mrs. Rowlauds's on Saturday; she also was there on Sunday; I knew Roberts lodged at Mr. Rowlands's; the reason that I watched Roberts in the brickyard on Friday evening, and that made me suspect him, was because that I had heard Thomas Jones, the thatcher, say that he (Roberts) was a hard rogue; it was at our house, one Sunday morning, that this was said; when Mrs. Rowlands mentioned the loss of the box, I told her what I had observed with respect to Roberts on Friday evening. Elizabeth Thomas deposed that she is a married woman and lives at Tillington; her husband is a shoemaker; on Saturday night last she saw the men coming from the brickyard; she saw Nicholls and one or two others in the road; heard one of the parties say "They'll be on the look out to-night;" it was not Nicholls who said it; Nicholls then parted from the rest; he wished them good night, and she saw him return in about ten minutes.—Martha Jones deposed to having seen the prisoner Nicholls go to the shed in the brickyard on the Satuday evening, and to his walking to aud fro along the road near it in a suspicious manner, but she offered no evidence that was material.—Nathan Lloyd was next called by Mr. Gwillim— he deposed: I am a labourer and brother-in-law to the prosecutor.—Mr. Bird: Are you a conjuror? —Witness: No, I am no conjuror.—Witness had heard such things before turning the key in the Bible; he saw it tried once and it succeeded, and the person who stole the money then, by virtue of the key and the Bible, gave it up.—By Mr. Pateshall: He never succeeded in such conjuration, but just thought he would try his luck on the present occasion.—Mr. Pritchard: Yes; and for doing so, you are liable to be sent to prison a rogue and vagabond.—Mr. Bird, magistrate's clerk: Do you, when you turn the key in the Bible, put the key upon any particular passage of scripture?—Yes; upon the 8th verse of the chapter of Deuteronomy. Witness said he could not repeat the verse, but it had some reference to thieving. Mr. Bird then repeated it, but the verse had no reference to the subject, and this "knowing man" was evidently at a fault.—Witness's examination was then resumed: I recollect Saturday evening last; I was in the brickyard with the prisoners and the rest of the men who worked there; I left the brickyard with the prisoners about six o'clock; I returned to the yard with them and saw them go into the house; I was asked by Mr. Rowlands to stop in the brickyard to watch; there were four men and little boy; on Sunday, I asked Nieholls how he came to return to the brickyard on Saturday evening, and he denied having done so. This witness further stated that, at about nine o'clock on Friday night, the time when the money was supposed to have been stolen, the prisoner Nicholls, and another youth who lodged at the prosecutors, got up a sham fight in the orchard, for the purpose he thought of drawing the people from the house, while one of the parties acquainted with the scheme stole the box money. While he and Mrs. Rowlands and other parties in the house were watching the sham fight, some person said the shop bell rang, and Roberts said he would go and see who was there; he saw Roberts go into the kitchen, and afterwards heard some person walk across the parlour; in two three minutes after Mr. Stephenson came and inquired for Mr. Rowlands.—Cross-examined by Mr. Pritchard: I was standing at the door some time watching the sham fight; the door looks into the orchard and adjoins the kitchen; five men and a boy lodge at Mr. Rowlands's; there were no bark strippers at Mr. Rowlands' on Friday night; and my brother-in-law had been bark stripping; I never saw lodgers go into the parlour unless my brother in-law or sister were present; I do not know the name of the person who went to the conjuror, at Preston Wynne.—Mr. Gwillim here said that there did not appear to be any evidence against the prisoner Nicholls; he should therefore abandon the charge against him. He thought, however, that there was a very strong case made out against the other prisoner. Mr. Pritchard then proceeded to address the jury in behalf of prisoner, Roberts, with his usual tact and ability, and declared that during his experience, he had never seen a weaker case brought into court of justice. —Mr. Bird said that if the younger of the Smiths had been a few years older, he should not have hesitated to commit the prisoner on her evidence; but if they should commit him on her evidence, and she should not be thought an eligible witness at the trial, the county would, unnecessarily, be put to £20 or £30 expense.— Mr. Gwillim said that, in his experience he had never heard a child give more straightforward evidence; his Worship might rely upon it that her evidence would be received at another tribunal.—After a short consultation had taken place between their Worships, Mr. Bird said "I wish there was another magistrate here, as Mr. Pateshall feels so much inclined to commit!" —Mr. Pateshall: If I were sitting here by myself, I would commit him; I think it is a very strong case of suspicion.--Mr. Bird shortly afterwards intimated that Mr. Pateshall was bent upon committing, and the prisoner was committed accordingly. Mr. Pritchard: Then I hope you will not incarcerate the poor man in prison till the sessions assizes upon bare suspicion.—Mr. Pateshall thought it was very strong case of suspicion.—The Magistrates agreed to accept bail, which was put in, and the prisoner was then liberated till the sessions.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18510531/019/0005
Hereford Times - Saturday 31 May 1851

SUPERSTITION.—About a month ago, three persons, whose names we must refrain from giving, but who are residing in the Forest of Dean, not far from Blakeney, three horses (one belonging to each) loose in the the open Forest. The grass being scarce at the time, the ammals did no remain long in one place. Next day, the owners, not finding the horses where they had left them, began to get uneasy, and, after a consultation with each other they agreed to go and consult a "cunning man" who resides in the Forest, and not far from them. Thither they accordingly repaired, when the oracle, after, as he affirmed, consulting his books, the planets and the stars, and receiving his consulting fee (which we are told was 1s. 6d.) from each, assured them that the three horses were stolen, that they had already through two market towns, that they were at that moment being driven through Iron Acton, and that there were men and women concerned in the stealing. When the consulatin was ended it was late in the evening, but the owners of the horses, being delighted with this piece of inforrnation, and thinking there was no time to be lost, engaged a boat to put them across the Severn the same night, and called on the police at Blakeney to go with them. When told from whom they had received their information, the police refused, but the owners of the horses were not to be deterred. Away they went across the Severn, vowing vengeance against the policeman for refusing to go with them. On their arriving at Iron Acton they obtained information that some gipsies with horses had been in that neighbourhood the day before. This they felt certain was the party who had their horses, and accordingly they went to the police in that place and set them in motion by telling them they had traced their horses to Iron Acton, in the possession of gipsies, who were gone on for Bristol. On this occasion they took good care to say nothing about the "cunning man." The poor gipsies were followed by the police, and traced through Bristol towards the west of England, but no stolen horses were found in their possession. The owners, after setting the police on the track of the supposed thieves, returned home, and on their arrival were told that one of the horses had been found in the Forest, near where he had been turned out. In a few days afterwards the other two were found by the police straying, one at Broadstone Farm [near Staunton], the other at Monmouth. We understand that occurrences like these are frequent in the Forest, and the "cunning man" is consulted by many of the poorer class, who place the greatest reliance on his delusive prophecies.


--

Following appeared widely

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18510604/006/0002
Hereford Journal - Wednesday 04 June 1851

The Cunning Man of the Forest of Dean

A short time since, three persons residing a short distance from Blakeney, in the Forest of Dean, turned out a horse each to graze. Finding but a short crop of grass, the animals strayed. On the owners missing them, a consultation took place, and it was resolved to seek the assistance of "the cunning man," who resides near, with the view of obtaining possession of the truant steeds. A fee of 1*s*. 6*d*. each soon set the man of stars plunging into the mysteries of his craft; and after various portentous consultations with this and that planet, and the casting up of mysterious problems, the sage, with the greatest solemnity, assured his confiding dupes that their horses had been stolen; that they had already passed through two market towns, and were then being driven through Iron Acton, and that "men and women" were concerned in the robbery. Thus enlightened, the horse-hunters, in high glee, left their "cunning" friend; and resolving to lose no time, at once crossed the Severn, and calling at a police station, requested some of the guardians of persons and property to accompany them in a chase after the thieves. The police, however, on ascertaining the source of their information, prudently declined the invitation. Nothing daunted, the intelligent trio, after a few maledictions on the blue-coats, proceeded to Acton, where "confirmation strong" of the oracle of the Forest was soon forthcoming, for lo, a number of gipsies had been seen to pass through the town with some horses! Certain they were the "men and women" who had possession of their horseflesh, the gallant hunters confided further chase to the police, telling them they had thence traced their lost horses, carefully avoiding, however, all allusion to a "cunning man" being their informant. The gipsies were traced by the police through Bristol, and some distance beyond, but no stolen horses could be found in their possession. The horse-hunters duly returned home, doubtless filled with admiration at the skill of the "cunning man;" but alas for his infallibility, one of the animals had, in the interim, strayed back near to its original place, where it was found quietly browsing, and the others were in a day or two discovered straying by the police, one at Breadstone Farm, and the other at Monmouth. We understand this same "cunning man" is much consulted by the poorer classes of the locality, but probably his reputation will be somewhat damaged by this occurrence.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18510614/045/0001
Hereford Times - Saturday 14 June 1851

Notices  
"S."— The constant pressure of original matter renders impossible for to depart from our rule not to copy articles communicated to other papers.

"L."— The account of "the Cunning Man of the Forest of Dean" appeared originally in our columns, from whence it has been taken by our contemporaries, as usual without acknowledgment.



--
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18381024/010/0004
Hereford Journal - Wednesday 24 October 1838

HEREFORDSHIRE SESSIONS. (Concluded from our last.) Tuesday, Oct. 16. Elizabeth Hudson pleaded guilty to the charge of breaking open a drawer in the house of her master Mr. Samuel Howells, of Leintwardine, and stealing a sovereign she was sentenced to fourteen days' solitary confinement The Chairman blamed the prosecutor for leaving a large sum of money (between 30 and sovereigns) in his drawer, instead of placing the cash in bank, and thus removing temptation from the servants. —[A fact evincing the grossest credulity and superstition, was connected with the above case. Some time before the trial was to come on, the mother of the prisoner posted off on a long journey into Shropshire for the purpose of consulting cunning man" as to the best means of getting her daughter over the difficulty. The fellow for sum of money supplied her with old silk sash, which he dignified with the name of a magic band," and stated that if the prisoner wore at the trial, she would be sure to be acquitted! The band was conveyed to the solicitor for the defence, who wished to cut it up and ascertain the contents, but the mother declined the proposal with the utmost horror, observing that destruction would come upon them all if this were done, and took it away with her. Whether the sash was worn or not, did not transpire, but its magic virtues were not put to the test, for the girl, following the sensible advice of her counsel, pleaded guilty as above stated.] James Bason, found guilty upon two indictments, the first for stealing hat, and the second for stealing a pair of spurs, was sentenced to seven days' solitary confinement for the first offence, and seven years' transportation for the second.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001272/18610601/122/0008
Monmouthshire Beacon - Saturday 01 June 1861
Superstition in the Nineteenth Century — Witchcraft

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18610529/050/0006
Hereford Journal - Wednesday 29 May 1861

SUPERSTITION IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.—WITCHCRAFT. A woman named Builth, wife of a mason residing in the parish of Walford, was summoned by Mary Whitaker, of the same place, to show cause why she should not be bound over keep the peace. Mr. Williams appeared for defendant.—Complainant deposed: On the 15th inst. she and her sister-in-law were going to a well for water; defendant was in her court, and had child in her arms, when she remarked "there comes old poison-cat;" this remark hurt the feelings of complainant so much, that she went into a neighbour's house and sat down; when she came out again, defendant made the same remark, which caused complainant to go into fit, and remain for hours insensible; complainant said the defendant was a witch, and defendant had said she could make anybody walk on their heads up a hill. Cross-examined: Did not call defendant a witch, nor accuse her of bewitching her pig; believed defendant was a witch; defendant had said she could use the black stick.—The Chairman enquired what that was? Mr. Williams replied that it was the wand in which was the supposed magic power. The Chairman wished to know if Mr. Wiliiams had it in Court; that gentleman denied that his client was witch, saying that she was not in possession of anything of the kind.—Complainant's examination continued: Her husband did not go into the Forest of Dean to consult a witch-finder, neither had she a charm round her neck; admitted that she was not always amiable, and might have peppered the defendant a little; did not say that the wise man in the Forest would make defendant dance within a circle.

Jane Hughes corroborated the foregoing evidence. She said the defendant was a reputed witch; had heard her say she could make people walk on their heads; she had told witness that she (the defendant) stuck her black stick in the garden, that witness could not enter it: she could bring all Kowle Hill and Bull's Hill (places in the parish), to prove that defendant had said that she could bewitch people.—Cross-examined: Had never seen defendant fly through the air on a broomstick; defendant was in the habit of wandering about the road at all hours of the night.—The Chairman said she had a perfect right to do so if she had a liking for it, and wished to know if that was the reason she was looked upon as a witch? Witness said defendant was very quarrelsome, and that nobody in the hill liked her.—Defendant denied the power imputed to her; she said her neighbours wished to make it appear that she was witch, and were consequently afraid of her; a great many persons were wearing trinkets they had got from the "cunning man" in the Forest, to act as charms against her witchcraft; she had lent complainant 15*s*. to buy pig, and because the pig would not eat, they said she had bewitched it, and went to the "cunning man" for him find out whether it was the cause or not; the pig would not eat, therefore it was killed and eaten as pork.

Mr. Williams, in addressing the Bench on behalf defendant, said that the information could not be sustained; defendant had made no threats or used any bodily violence; her making use of the expression "poison-cat," was not sufficient upon which to call upon the defendant for sureties; if complainant had any fear in her mind, it arose from her own imagination that defendant had some supernatural power; a number of women were living in the same neighbourhood—they quarrel, and run for justice; in a short time they become reconciled, and live on friendly terms again; he contended that there was no case made out; it was a case of defamation of character, and if such a charge was to be established as precedent, there would be no end of such charges brought before their worships.

Captain Power replied: In that case there would more clients for Mr. W. The witnesses had proved that defendant had commenced the quarrel.

Mr. Williams said he should be able to prove that such was not the case; and called the defendant's two daughters (two good-looking girls), saying those were the defendant's charms.

Mr. Whatley thought they appeared like "Lancashire witches."

The Bench at length advised the parties to compromise the matter, by each paying their own costs.

Mr. Williams asked the Bench to pronounce the defendant was not a witch.

The Chairman said, of course, the Bench did not consider that she was a witch; and, addressing the parties gave them some good advice, and recommended them to live together as friends and neighbours should do.

Thus ended this strange tale of witchcraft, created much amusement to a crowded Court.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18610531/018/0006
Morning Chronicle - Friday 31 May 1861

WITCHCRAFT AT Ross.— A woman named Builth, residing near Ross, has been charged before the magistrates with annoying another woman named Margaret Whitaker. The complainant had been called an "old poison cat," and a witch, and defendant had said she could make anybody walk on their heads up a hill. Jane Hughes deposed that the defendant was a repuited witch. Had heard her say that she could make poople walk on their heads. She had told witness that if she (the defendant) stuck her black stick in the garden, that witness could not enter it. She could bring all Kowle Hill `[Howle Hill?]` and Bull's Hill (places in the parish) to prove that defendant had said that she could bewitch people. Cross-examined: Had never seen defendant fly through the alr on a broomstick. Defendant was in the habit of wandering about the road at all hours of the night. Defendant denied the power imputed to her. She said her neighbours wished to make it appear that she was a witch, and were consequently afraid of her. A great many persons were wearing trinkets they had got from the "cunning man" in the Forest of Dean to act as charms againsther witchcraft. She had lent complainant 15s. to buy a pig, and because the pig would not eat, they said she had bewitched it, and went to the "cunning man" for him to find out whether it was the case or not. The pig would not eat, and therefore it was killed and eaten as pork. The solicitor for the complainant asked the Bench to pronounce that she was not a witch. The Chairman said of course the Bench did not consider that she was a witch, and the parties were then dismissed.

--

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002067/18880906/047/0003
Ross Gazette - Thursday 06 September 1888

SAVAGE ASSAULT. *Agnes Baldwin* and *Arthur Baldwin*, Brampton-street, Ross, were charged with assaulting an aged woman named Ann Harris, on the 27th August.

Ann Harris, who was accommodated with a seat, deposed: I live in Brampton-street; I am a single woman; on Monday last, I was standing at my door, and the defendant, Agnes Baldwin, came to me and pulled me down; Arthur Baldwin blackguarded me, but I do not think he touched me; Mrs. Baldwin pulled the hair off my head, and struck me on the forehead; the hair produced is the first lot Mrs. Baldwin palled off my head; she also pinched me on the arm; these was a fire in one of the back-kitchens in the row; I heard Mrs. Baldwin say that her husband caused the fire; I did not tell any one that Mr. Baldwin set it on fire; it was a mattress that was on fire.

Defendant said complainant was canting outside the house until 11 o'clock, and she kept on rowing in bed till about 3 o'clock in the morning. If she had any bruises, she received them from tumbling about in her bedroom.

Emma Davies, wife of Samuel Davies, deposed: I live opposite the defendants; on the day in question I saw Baldwin, who came to the door, and blackguarded complainant for telling the gentleman who collects the rents that he had set a mattress on fire; complainant said, "Your wife said so;" Arthur Baldwin told his wife to go and pull complainant's hair off, which she did; after that Baldwin and his wife assaulted the complainant; next morning, Mrs. Baldwin said she would have complainant's heart out, and set her on fire, so that she could not say a word.—By the Bench: I live about six yards from the defendant's; Mrs. Baldwin calls complainant 'Peggy, the witch,' and it gets her temper out; I have seen them quarrelling before.—By defendant: The complainant had hold of Mrs. Baldwin by the leg, and the language used was most indecent.

Defendant said complainant would have torn the trousers off his wife's back if he had not interfered (laughter).

Mrs. Baldwin said complainant was constantly insulting people, and she could scarcely go to her house without being annoyed by her.

The Rev. E. B. Hawkshaw said the defendants had committed a wanton and savage assault upon an old and helpless woman. It was an offence of a very serious nature, and defendants would have to pay 25s. between them, including costs.


--
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002068/19111228/112/0005
Ross Gazette - Thursday 28 December 1911

TO DO ?a fiction

A TALE OF OLD ROSS. THE WITCH OF BRAMPTON-STREET. [By B. B.]


The one sure way to old Jim Painter's heart was to listen well, and to show no sign of disbelief augured favourably f'r another good story at a future date. One  must admit that, as a rule, the old man WAR worth listening to. and what he didn't know about the old town—cell , never happened! "  In his °en words: " There ain't much as ha bin going on anywheres 'tweon Wilton Bridge and Wes'on Cross these last. fifty year as I don't know summat about!"  And I was a good listener! Old Jim told  me so himself. I could wish that my memore equalled my patience; but I fear that, as far as I am concerned, the best part o f'" Painter's histories and mysteries was buried  when they laid his old, worn-out body to restunder the ancient elms a decade or more ago. To see the old man of a summer evening heardstanding at his door, with his one hand resting shoulder-high on the doorpost, and the other continually combing his whiskers, in- I  dieated he was there for the pritoose of what be was p l ease d tr, denominate 1,, hit a a  dat;" mid to eross the road, oi in any other '  way attempt to avoid him, was to re l ogm ,oneself into his black books. her 1  One evening the ann going down a rosy red, tinting " mackerel ' sky, as I halted I 'urg er ' in front of old Painter's door to pass the time of day." "Good evening, Mr Painter. The sky looks pretty, doesn't it?" "Good e i ening. Aye! Look pretty enough, but we'm going to have a windy night. wou mark me! And I do hate a windy night. These or drums here." toeciue his head back to indicate that he spoke of the house he inhabited, "three ol' drums here be just like sr many sieves, they he. and the wind whistle through 'ern for all the world like a lot_ o'_ witches " Wiuthest" I laughed "Don't you laugh at witches." he said, looking at me very seriously. "I don't liks to bear folks sneer about 'em. 'cos—well, 1 do know what I do know. I supFose you don't believe nothing about witches, 'fo6 you aint seen none! Why do you know wa had on' in this very town! Old Betty Williams 'twas, and her lived up a top o' Branton Street—they used to call her the Witch o' Branton street. And her didn't mind it a bit; in fact. I knows her was proud o' being called it. I was very young then. and when I used to hear the tales shout her, what her could do, and how her used to change herself into animiles, I used to grin about it SaluO as you was doing just now." "Im sorry," I ventured apologetically, but the old man went on. . . . "I have heard as her was a dab-band at charming away warts and curing sore eyes and all them sort of things. She know'd a lot about herbs and was always a-hunting around for 'ern and a-cooking of 'em; and there's no doubt as she was very clever in her way Now, there was one thing in this world as her hated most particular. Her couldn't a-bide dogs—not any sort. 'Twas said as there was one dog as whenever he passed her at the door used to hark and snap at her, and her used to look at 'nu, and grind her tith together; and one day, as the dog was a-corning down the street, when he got to Betty. William's door there was a great. hig strange cat n-sitting on the doorstep. 0' course, the dog goes for the cat, hut the: do sav asshe jus gived 'tin one or two pelts with her paws, and away be went a-yowling down the street like mad, and he never corned near the old 'ooman's door agen. "But I don't really know nothing shout whether that tale was jonnuek or no. This I do know though, and if you haint in no hurry tell von. It was just dayhreak one morning, three or your on us bwors about town was a-going off up Branton Street. Dick Welyn was one on 'cm (hut yon don't recollect him), and he had got his whippit with' him. That was a pretty dog. a' no mistake, and him could catch anything as ever runned on four legs I do believe. Early as 'twas, Betty Williams was a-stood at her door. "'Where he you bwoys a-going this time o' the morning?' her says. "'We'm wing mushrooming up at Hilly Ayton.' says I. " What's tha want thic dog with the for then? He don't catch mushrooms, do he?' says the old 'ooman. "'No,' chimes in Dickie Welyn, but he's a dulled fine 'un a'ter a hare! °ain't yn like to give us a run, Betty? I do bear as you can turn yerself into a hare when you'd a-mind. I'll lay as my g bud give ya socks if he had ya in front on 'ne!' "Old Betty she looked that wild as you! don't know, and said as if he didn't clear off with his impidence heed limb both him and I his dog, and with that her slams her door. Dick laughed, and so did the rest on us, antl we stood a I•it. a-talking about what jolly fine fun it hod be if we was ever to come across old Betty whilst she was a hare! Well, a'ter standing there a minute or two we moves on, and was all a-sauntering. along, when just where you turns off for Cawdor Well, I'm classed if a hare didn't slip over the wall just iu front on us, and just as smartly leers back agen, and away' down evade she goes. We just forgot about the mushrooms and everything else, and away we goes a'ter the hare. If we hadn't been so exeitaxi, we should 'a noticed that there was muntnat very queer about this Cheer' hare. She doubled, she turned. she twisted, I and she just seemed to he a-playing peep-po with the dog all the time—at first anyway's. She reerningly Oirl't want t' get too far awns from us. Presently she made a clear run down to the old orchard by the One Mill. Then she starts her gar es again, all over the place till you'd thought she'd nearly run the whippit off his legs. Then, over the fame she slip 4. and cuts off round - by the One Mill. and for a hit it looked as if her had gone away up the Rope Walk. 'Stead of which shed lept the brook, and was a-going straight up the Stook meadow—a nice bit on the fiat, you know. "That was just where she went wrong, von see, for the whippit was at her heels in leas than no time, and the last thing we seed o' the hare was just afore you comes to the Brook's-month. Here, you know, the hroo's runs through deep. steep hanks; and Ns the' hare corned to the bank. we saw the dog nip' hold of her close to her sent, and over they both pitch-poled together out of sight. " W e eouel hear the dog a-yelping as if I he was being murdered. Up we rushed to the place where we'd seed 'em go over. and what d've think we saw? Why, there was Betty 'Williams a-standing in•the brook up to her knees in water, a-walloping the poor dog most ohmercifully with a branch as sh'd snatched off one o' them hushes there. " Where's the hare," I. says. "'What the deuce be you a-doing to my dog?' shouted Dick Welyn. " `lf you don't call this infernal mongre: off, screw his neck round,'" shrieked Betty; but the dog didn't want much calling off, for he'd stunk away from her, and was standing a-shivering and a-shaking on a hit of shelving bank there. The 'oonian, her starts a- scrambling up the opposite hank to us, muttering and cussing to herself, and when her'd got. up her turns round to us and shook her fist at m. and d--d the lot: Then she made to go off, but r'ooid hardly hobble along, and kept a-clutching at and a-holding of her hand on her hip. " 'Hallo, misais! What's the matter with yer hip?' calls out Diekie Welyn, in a alien , jug sort o' way. Betty just turned her head, and says: it's notating to speak of. I (witched ray foot in a scent-tump Onolehole). and twisted toy leg. if you wants to know.' 'Oh, aye! I expect so! Shouldn't wonder, amoral Dkk Welya. And I spose you was a-walkingabont in the bruk to mire it! No fear! . I knows, butties!' he shouted, excited-like to es. 'I know . I knows, . Betty!' and he runs down the bank opposite to alter sho was got to, and he shaves his - 

poioted finger out at her, and laughs like  know, Betty! you vas the bloomsign of ing hare we was chasing, and be had ya fair and square; and that's where he nipped hold on ya where va be a-holding!' and ho starts laughing at her again.

'You Karl You owdacious liar!' screams the 'ooman, and I tell ya straight she was terrible to see. She used the most awful langwidge as ever I did hear, and said we should all be paid out; and she kept on like that till even Dick Welyn began to look pretty white in the face, and we all turned round quietly, and walked off t'other way  and left her.

"But, Mr. Painter, do yon really believe she was the hare?" I remarked. as my, old friend paused and ran his fingers though his beard.

"Why for not?" came his quick reply. "If sh weren't that hare, can you tell me how her corned to be aertending up at the Brook's Mouth when w e'd seed her hardly any time afore up top o' Branton -street And we runned all the way! No, my buoy. her couldn't a-done it on two lep. Dickie  was right. It was her. 'Sbles which, atweyr, walked lame on the one side a'ter.



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002068/19140101/105/0005
Ross Gazette - Thursday 01 January 1914

DICK WELYN'S LOVE AFFAIRS. [Some time subsequent to the relating of the incident concerning "the Witch of Brampton-street," my old friend Jim Painter told me what he professed to be the sequel thereof. Jim had the reputation of "romancing," and as to whether the following really happened or was merely the figment of his rather lively imagination, I prefer to leave to the reader; but I have attempted to set it down, as near as memory will serve, in his own words.—B.B.]

Funny things do happen, even in our times. You'll mind me tellin' you one day about that they to-do we had with the Branton Street Witch, when Diek Welvn's dog chased her a'ter heed. turned herself into a hare. An° p'raps you fell a-wonderin' if her ever kept her word about having her revenge on 'un. Well, she did! An' the way she 'served 'un out INOIz to mix herself un with his love affairs—and Richard had more'n one, d can assure you but as to how many on 'em Betty Williams shoved her nose into I can't say. No more could Dick Welyn for that. matter. But somehow or other they seemed to be off afore they wuz on. so to speak, and the ROM wenches appeared to fight. shy on 'un. Not 'cause he warn't o decent enough sort o' chap, by no means, for a nicer bloke never stood up in shoe-leather, and as him and me were such pals I know'd most all his business. It vruz a'ter Dick had been walking out some little while along of a Jennie Greaves —one o' the maids she Was at the Bank (she warn't a Ross personl—it wuz a'ter he had been keeping company for a goodish while with her that Dick got a bit suspicious that then wrz somebody as wnz a-trying to upset his apple-cart along o' Jennie. 0' course, I had this straight from Dick's own lips, so you'll understand it bent any o' my making- 111). Jennie she began to cool off all of sod den. hut still she'd go for walks with 'im for the ways of maids he peculiar. At last Dick he made sip his mind as he'd know what wuz amiss. One night their ramble took 'em along the Rene Walk and they'd got to the old gate by the One Mill. Relf-way through the Pete Dick turned to the girl. "Now, look here. Jennie," says he. "T 1 wants to know what's wrong 'tween you and me. You knows T he very fond n' you—we 'a bin walking out together long enough for you to find that out surely—lint you seems very short with me lately. What have done, or what 'ant I done I'd like to know?" Jennie she wouldn't answer 'on fora minit or so, and Dick he inst stood ther holding the gate, while Jennie twiddled her ribbons through her fingers - till Dick felt mad n'most "Hadn't we heft& be going on?" asked Jennie at last. "No!" bursts out Dick, angrified. "We don't go from here till you tells me what's up." "I don't kno* as I be called on to tell you anything," say Jennie, a hit defiant. "I-be-going-to-know!" says Dick, slow and determined-like. "Well, then. Dick." says the girl, a'ter considering a bit, "Will you swear as ther be nothing 'tween you and any other maid in this town? Answer me that! Only. do tell the truth, for goodness' sake, for if I find yon out I'll never speak to you again!" "I'll answer you," replied Dick, " and jolly quirk, too, as my conscience is clear. Thor ain't nothing 'tween me and no other maid that breathes. Finger wet, finger dry! Thor, see!" and Dick wetted his finger and dried it on his cost, and drawed 'en cross his throat, like the youngsters do. " And I do believe you, Dickie dear," and Jennie she started to cry. "Come and sit down on the Mill steps, my girl," says Dick, putting his arm round her in a comforting way. "Ther's a bit more I'd like to find out whiles we be talking slant it," and with that they goes through the gateway and sits down on the Mill steps (Thee's three on 'em up to th° door, y'. know). "Now," says Richard, a'ter they'd settled theireelves on the stews, "I be very impatient to know who's bin trying to set you agin me!" "Oh! never mind all that now," says Jennie. "Nothing matter now I know you bent a.carrying on with somebody else and fooling me!" "Carryin' on!" and Dick laughed. "I like that! Me carrying on! Why, ther bent a Ross girl as'll go two steps along o' me anywhere. And I don't know why Not as I do want 'em nowadays, for since I've knew' l you. Jennie, ther bent room in this 'ere heart of mine for another female soul. " "You owdashus liar!" Dick an' .Tennie they jumped off them steps like one o'clock, and Jennie she gives a squeal, for the voice that shouted out them three words came from right behind 'em. They could see as the mill door wuz now partly open, hot it wuz too dark to make nut who twuz stood inside. Jennie she hang on to Dick's arm she trembled so. But Dick he faced round and sages out bravely enough: "Who he you, and what he you a-doing of in ther, a-sneaking and listening to what folks he a-talking about?" "Yon knows who I he well enough." came the voice, as though her wuz crying (for 'twus a female's voice right enough). "flanged if I do!" says Dick. "You knows well enough who I be, and why I be here. Bent I here to meet von? Didn't you ax me to? Only I s'pose with all the rest of your flames you've got 'em muddled up. and so von brings your latest wench round here a-filling her up with yer lies!" Dick he stood ther that dumb he couldn't get a word out for a hit, and Jennie she drops his arm and begins to edge off. Then Dick suddenly flares up. "I don't know who you he: I don't know. I say! And it's you as he telling the lies. Come out on it, and let's see yer evil face, whoever you be. Come out. I say, and be honest!" "Oh aye! I daresay!" shouts back the voice, sneering-like: " Come out. So as your new girl can see my face and go and make me the laughing-stock of the town. No thank you, Mister Welyn; I stays where I be, as yon knows well enough who I he." Jennie starts sobbing and mumbling summat about it being right what she'd heard, &ter all. " What's say?" says Dick, turning quick on her. "nu wuz only amusing yerself along o' me a'ter all, and I be going home," and with that she begins to move off agen. Dick he catches hold of her arm and says he: "You listen here. Jennie °reeves. give you my solemn davy as I don't know who that he in them" and with t'other hand he pointed hack through the mill door. "You liar." came the voice again. "Don't You take no notice elf that. An' morel If you moves from here afore pulls that false wretch out of ther and proves meself I'll never speak to von agen—no, not if yer goes down on yer headed knees and axes me to. " "You run away home and leave me to my sweetheart," the voice cried, "for him is my sweetheart and ha' sworn so many a time." Dick he turns to Jennie and says: "Now, who he you s-going to believe, that'n in tlmr or me?" But poor Jennie she couldn't stand no more. and She just turned and rnnned up Tankard Street as hard as she could. Dick he stood and watched her till she'd disappeared round the corner; then he dashed up them steps, and through the door, and he shouts; "Now, you purty beauty, I be going to see who you be, and heaven help you when I lays hands on you!" He stood a turning his eyes this way and that whilst he wuz saying this, but nern a glimpse of anything or anybody moving could he get, though as ho finished speaking a soft, mocking sort of a laugh seemed to come from tither side of th' room. Then he thought seed summat move, and be makes a dash a it, and throwed his arms round it, only to find as he wuz clutching hold on to a big heap of empty sacks as come falling all over 'ho and smothering 'im with doubt. As he went sprawling ther came a reg'lar screech of laughter, and the mill door slammed to with a bang as made every hair on his head stand on end. Pp he Rot as well as he could, a-spitting and spluthering end trying to get the doubt out of his eyes and mouth, a. bumping hisself up agin the walls, and cussing like old Nick cos he couldn't find the door. When he did find 'nn, out he rushed and tried to listen for footsteps, but he counld'nt hear nothing. Then from the bridge close by came the words, " Pretty Dick!" followed by another of them loud mocking laughs. But 'twux a dark night, and afore Dick could cover the few yards from the mill to the bridge, them wuz naught to be seen. It fair upset poor Dick, and he came straight to my place. White as a sheet he wuz, and a hit shaky too, and when we had it all over he says: "Now, what d'ye make of it all, ,Lim? " "Well," says I, " what about Betty Williams? " my mind seeming to fly to 'her in a minit. Dick he sat a-considering and scratching his head, and then says slowly-like: " 'Tweren't a bit like her voice . . . no, not a hit . . . Yet it seems like her handwork . Aye . . perhaps so. But bow could her Yo it, and her lame?" Well, I can't pertend to explain how twos done. But ther wern't much doubt but what it wuz Betty Williams handwriting 111 over (and it was as it turned out a'ter—l'll tell you some day perhaps); •but as I say how her did it's a mystery to this day. We heard as Jennie Greaves left the town a day or two a'ter. Anyways it wus all off 'tween her and Dick. and that was the end of one of Dick Welvn's love affairs! (To be continued .

MERRY GAMES FOR MERRYMAKERS. BY ANITA GIBSON. At this season some of our readers will oubtless be on the lookout for amusing Ovelties wherewith to heighten the enjoyment of the festivities. Party-givers who would avoid the slight constraint which sometimes makes itself felt at the outset of a social evening would do well to set the ball 'rolling by starting some absorbing competitive game, of a humorous nature for preference. Make your guests laugh heartily at the outset, and the success of the evening's entertainment is ensured. For real, undiluted tun, with a dash of excitement in it, A SMELLING COMPETITION will be found hard to beat. Offer a prize (a bottle of scent) to the moat successful competitor. Preparations for this competition must be made beforehand; but the little trouble will be amply repaid by the merriment which it will certainly cause. Fill twelve little muslin bags respectively with dried lavender, camphor, pepper, coffee, lea, cocoa, peppermint, tobacco, mustard, sage, nutmegs, cloves, or any other scented stuffs available. Tie up the tops of the bags and hang them by strings to a line stretched across the room. The guests are provided with a paper and pencil and told to write down, in order, the names of the contents of the bags. This must be found out by smelling the bags, no one being allowed to touch them with the fingers. Ins given time, say five minutes, the competitor who is found to be the most correct wins the prize. Next to a competition, anything in the way of a good mystification is sure to be appreciated by a mixed gathering. The following little hoax game will be found capital fun. It is called 

--
A made up(?) tale of "Old Betty the witch"

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001294/18531224/079/0004
Silurian - Saturday 24 December 1853

The Witch of St B———— (Briavels?)
 TO DO

Sir,—With your permission I dedicate the following: first, to all young folks come home for the Christmas holidays; secondly, to all ardent admirers of tales of witchcraft; and, lastly, to all "snub-nosed boys, who shake well in their shoes" at a good story of ghosts and goblins.

But in a sieve, I'll thither sail,  
And, like a rat without a tail.  
I'll do ♦ * * "—Macbeth.

My great-grandfather used to tell the following tale to his grandchildren, when sitting round the fire on a winter's night; and by them it was heard with all the fright and curiosity which the young experience in listening to a tale of horror. There lived in the village of St. B———, about the middle of the eighteenth century, an old woman who was looked upon as a witch, and numberless were the tales that were told of her wicked deeds. If it chanced that a cow lost her milk earlier than usual. "Betty Bitcher, the old necromancer, had bewitched her;" if a mare cast her foal, and the poor old woman had been hobbling along to gather her burden of sticks anywhere near the field (if a week or a fortnight before the event,) still "it was her doings," and deep and dark were the anathemas launched against her; if the butter would not come in the course of churning, (which will happen to the best of dairymaids sometimes,) "old Betty was at her tricks again," and had bewitched the cream; and oftentimes was the poor old creature dragged out of her miserable abode to go and "bless the cream:" then, if the butter came, there was a positive proof of her bewitching powers; if it came not, the "devil was in her heart and had nullified the blessing!" Sometimes the old woman dared to face the whole parish by going to the monthly meeting of stately churchwardens, dignified overseers of the poor, and burly constables, to ask for a small advance upon her weekly pittance—decrepid with an incurable asthma, passed the revered age of "three score years and ten" and pressing hard towards her fourth score, she stood, before them.

TO DO  What rating, reviling, and scolding then took place: and any pecuni iry loss or misfortune had befallen one of the mighty men the conclave, majority might have carried the question to pop the old; lady the tire, and gently burn, or rather roast (as the expression was) the d—l out her;" however, as mygrandsire used laughingly to tell, the additional sixpence per week was generally added to her stipend, some voting it from pity, but it was strongly suspected that the party headed by the burly constable did it from little fear ot the poor old lady's power to come," and not wishing to have ricketty babies, or babes brought into the world with one eye in the forehead, and the mouth placed where the organ of sound should have teen. Betty was dismissed from the meeting with an exordium from the parson, churchwardens, and parish clerk, to home now and leave off her bud ways, to think of her end and eschew evil." Aye, aye," said the constable; that s right, gentlemen, hope she will chew ike devil, and bite him pretty hard too." Sometimes she would attempt to explain away her offences, and commencing in her usual style with Well, gentlemen, there's one above that knows"—but she never got any farther; for tiie thoughts poor Betty having anything to with, or say about One who looks with pity cn the shorn lamb" raised such tempest that she, lifting up her hands and making her short curtsey, was glad hear the vestry door slam loud behind her; for how could the clerk, the constable, the village schooltnastf-r listen to such things from such "an one?" Time went on and old Betty was drawing close to that bourne from whence no traveller returns: ' her eightieth birth-lay had l ing passed by, and still urchins, aye, and big lubberly clowns 100, ran fast by her cottage door after night-fall, fearing they knew not what, only knowing that everybody said "a witch lived there!" It was the year 17—, in the latter part of December, a clear frosty night, the moon shining brilliantly, but at times almost obscured clouds, which rising the high west, swept swift across the heavens, changing colours and objects for the moment, and then leaving all bright and clear again. My great grandsire, in brown coat, brown beeches to match, brown bob wig, not quite so brown as his coat, waistcoat, and nether garments, sat half dozing his fireside when he was aroused from his nap the sudden entiance of old bai ber-.surg. on Wortran, the last practitioner of that double calling in our village, a most useful man in those days. the plethoric parson alter eating six pounds "forest venison," with two large onions an incentive,an act professional which was called for the, fourth helping, with the second tankard strongale. (Ah! what constitutions those days compared to cur times, when two glass-s of light wine are almost too much for the gentleman with the cuffs turned up and the collar turned down, reversing nature and dress the same rime, and who has long since eschewed port too heavy for his nerves!) He extracted the raging, tooth of the red-faced country milkmaid, and that of the roaring lout, who said, cut qff yead if ye can t out! He also gave relief to the corns of the squire's laly, who, having pressed her toes into the sharpest point possible, was kept up to the position by pair of high hee.s, and which, probably, caused the introduction of minut's for who could have jumped very nimbly about with laose martyred, crampedup toes? So ih ladies and gentlemen moved minuet, gently or. their feet those instruments of torture would permit. The other ami great qualification of the barber-sergeou we must leave surmise, only it was reported was called Daddy Worgan by the village urctiins, who were taught believe brought them in from under gooseberry-bash. The barber-surgeon's haste admitted of no delay it was to beg the old gentleman would step down to the Mai: house, the locality of Betty Pitcher's wattle-aud-daub " residence, they would kill the old woman, as they were making hole in the ice to duck her in; caking fur his stick they started off together—two chivalrous kntghts-errant of seventyfive, thereabouts. When they reached the scene of action, there was old Betty, pmic-strickeo, in the middle of the one lubberly clown spitting in her face; another know if could veel; bat all bent some signal piece of for imagined evils; whilst three or lour country yok Is were deliberately preparing the chasm in which to duck the old witch. Soon the old old sticks (oak, of course, from the Forest of Dean) went to work, as wiilii gly and forcibly as seventy-live would let them; and, like ail sudden onslaughts,caused panic, and then followed narley, when forth stood the Saltun, "Salt-marsh.''—This soub.iquet was acquired from the number hogsheads of strong beer and rough Gloucestershire cider he swallowed, but still dry, dry, always dry! ami, iher for-, called Sah-tii by his super;ors, but the by his and boon companions. —He u,,enud the conference in the following sir,in:—"l'll tell 'er how 'tis, sir; ha' cotched her at last - e'eara.-, whistle, and I'li one sh ill duck it out her; and so come on my lads, now for a drop cold watar to cool her!" Another skirmish, and a closer approach the edge of the old ditch, (.t moat which ran round the castle, and continued to do until the last year, when scnilary regulations called for a removal of the nuisance ) within a lew foci of the yawning chasm waiting its prey. The fate poor, Betty and my grandsire's wig, with the effect which misfortune befalling the latter had on the fortunes the farmer must reman: till your next publication, as feel that my yarn has spun out much longer than I had intended. Wishing you, and yo ir readers, a merry Christmas, and a happy New Year, remain, &c.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001294/18531231/077/0004
Silurian - Saturday 31 December 1853

The St. B——— witch concluded

(Concluded from our last.) the pricking of my thumbs, Something this way wicked comes. At the conclusion of my last paper, old Betty the witch was left in the hands her enemies, the scrimmage continuing with loud shouting of—" You shant"—"I will"—"She shall"—"She shan't be ducked," and so tho fury the fray continued. It is well known by all belligerents, that twenty to three are long odds in favour of the strong side, and so it appeared. Nearer, and nearer Still, the mighty host reached the hole made in the ice; and whether old Betty, grandsire, or barber-surgeon Worgan, was to take the first dip, or if, like t/te graces three, the plunge was to be simultaneous, appeared to doubtful; the oaken cudgels had changed sides, not from any disposition to rat, but were forced over to the other side by some powerful agency—perhaps expediency"— which has made many changes in our times. But, be that as it may, either from accident or design, the chances of war, off fell the hat and brown wig of one of the ancient heroes, fighting manfully for woman dear," and, rolling along the ice, parted company, when down went the wig into the abyss. Did yon ever see a wig pulled out of a pool of water? I have. Did you ever see very young hedgehog, when scared by a yelping puppy, roll itself up at the first bark? I have. And I know no two things that resemble each other more than a wig picked out of a pickle," and the hedgehog rolled up for defence; and where the aperture is to be found of either might pozzle a philosopher. Now, when the majority saw the hatless, wigless, head of the old gentleman, and heard the anathemas launched forth against their proceedings by barber-surgeon Worgan, they once more stood to their arms, with the arrant old witch trembling prisoner; and being fearful of carrying things too far; remembeiing, also, that day of reckoning might come, in more ways than one,they paused. After placing the loose handkerchief" over the bald head Berkleys" not having come into fashion then), with the fantail hat surmounting the same, a face rather flush'd with the exciretaent of the fray, perhaps with some little disgust at the fate of the bob-wig, aud the thoughts of his personal appearance at that moment, grandsire shouted out, the top uf his voice, "Let the old woman! - ' And, strange to say, old Betty found the iron manacles of the lawless released, and was not long in limping over to the minority. Seeing the vantage ground he had made, he continued, Shame on ye, shame ou ye ad, to serve the old woman in this mauner; what is all this foolery about? You, sir—and you, sir you ought at least to have known better. As for tnat drunken salt o.arKh, he deserves the cart-tail. There, Betty, go into your house: hnmble as it is, we will take care you shall have peace therein, or I will know the reason why," "God Al'rijhty bless you, sir, if yon had not come down lo my help, those wicked rascals wou'd hare been the death of rue; and now 1 can scarcely breathe, I am frightened; but thert one above My grandson saw dark and portent'ms clouds on swarthy brows, and advised the old woman to say nothing farther, but. into her dwelling. this time the brawl of tongues, not in harmonious sounds, brought many to the scene of action, and the minority, finding their strength the increase of numbers, assumed tne authoiita ive, and btrber-surgeon Worgan cried aloud for explanation. And now, young sit, or little miss, whichever may be reading tale, and anxious for the denouement, hero it comes, like the postscript of a letter, with all the news it. I'll tell you, gentlemen, all about it," says one of the party, making two steps forward, but not far from his own friends, knowing that two hours in the village stocks, which were within an easy distance of the battle field," would be neither easy nor comfortable ona. frosty night, in December, I'll tell you ail about it; there were eight or ten of us sliding on the ditch, and nice slide boys had made;"(aovv the spokesman was "Carrotty ■ Dick" from the churchyard-farm, the juvenile age twenty-two—stout, short-set, broad-shouldered, bigheaded, red hair like bristles, and such mouth—oh, yon may guess it Well," quoth Dick, the old 'un who is always in her tantrums whenever boys want to slide on ttie ditch, or play ball in the church-yard, or wickets on the Bailey-tump;"—all which spots of amusement were located near the old woman's cot; and seldom did the amusements close without some affront to old Betty, either by word or deed, hence the dislike of the poor old creature to rude, rollicking hobble-de-hoys; and hence the cruel treatment she received at their tender mercies. Go on, Dick, and finish your story. Well, as we were sliding so nicely, and I was trying to kick up Charley, for a lark; sneaking down the castle walls she comes, and runs light dash across the ice in the shape of great, big, black cat; ??e saw her: that's old Betty says one; that's she, cried another; and away we all started to catch her; but she was too knowing for us boys, and just as came to where her crossed the ice crack-crack—it went, and if we had slid three yards further, every boy of us would have gone slap into the ditch,"—and serve you right too" cries a voice, something like the tone of grandsire's. Carrotty Dick stopped short at this cutting interlude so deep tale; but this time the new-comers long, for the sequel* so they cried out, on Carolty Dick had drawn breath; he felt himself the hero of the tale; he had gained over the audience, and proceeded. Well, we watched her, and up the roof of the house she ran, and right down the chimney, there lost sight of her, didn't we, Charley Aye, that's all gospel truth," cried half score besides Charley. That's old Bettv at her devildoms again, we all said; now let us go right in and catch her; and the Salt'un coming by, we told him all about it, and the Salt'un says, come on, boys,' so we burst open the door, but the old 'un was too quick tor us, and had turned back into herself again but Lord, how she was panting for breath after being hunted so!" Deaf to all arpuneuls, nothing could convince them, that they had not seen and hunted old Betty Pitcher the witch, in the shape of a large black cat, and this was credited by some to the end of the eighteenth cen'tiry. The old gentleman had a knack of putting his hand up to his head once or twice whilst relating the tale, to see (it was suppnsre) if the old bob-wig was comfonably there and to sundry queries from his young audience, said, 4 suppose that some frightened cat ran across the ice, leaped up to the thatch of old Betty's low dwelling, and hid behind the chimney that the "boys' all rushing in a body to one apot, cracked'the ice by their own weight; and that the size and colour of puss were created by their own fears ' "Ah, but the panting for breath!" said my father, credulously, with 1 knowing shake of the head. "Bill, you booby," said my grandaire, "you would pant too if you had an asthma of thirty years standing." "But how camo the cat such a big one? Old K'.ys, who was a boy at that tim«, says, that the cat was as large as sheep, and black as a coal; and that the boys met the next night, ami reckoned up evt-ry puss in the parish, and there was net one black oue out of the total of thirty eight. How came the cat such a big one?" That was because the boobies had told it so many times, 'till at last they believed it." "Ah!" said father, with a long drawn sigh, "I wish had been alive to have seen it, and caught her." "And if thou had'st," says the old gentleman, waxing warm, " I hope she would have given thee a good scratching!" the young ones laughed, partly at grandfather wit, and partly get rid of their own fears. But ere another year had coma round, old Betty had reached that bourne'' wihere all asthmas and reviltngs cease; and since the death of old Betty Pitcher, "old witches" have given way to younger ones and many a stalwart yeoman has been bewitched by the black and sparkling eyes of the young sorceresses our village. £. r.D. Cardiff, Dec. 2bth, 1853.