# Infanticide at Ruardean

TO DO

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000532/18421105/030/0003
Gloucester Journal - Saturday 05 November 1842

HORRIBLE INFANTICIDES — SIX INFANTS MURDERED BY THEIR MOTHER.— We have this week the painful duty of recording a case of long continued and inhuman depravity almost unparalleled in the annals of crime. It appears that a woman named Frances Bennett, residing at Ruardean Hill, in the Forest of Dean, being very ill, and probably fearing to die with the undivulged guilt of murder upon her conscience, communicated to the Rev. Henry Formby, curate of Ruardean, that about twelve months since she became the mother of a child by a man named Thomas Yapp, with whom she has been for eight or ten years cohabiting, which child, after it had lived a few days she destroyed by poisoning it; after which she and Yapp buried it beneath the pavement of the brewhouse. The wretched woman further added that she had been the mother of five other children by the same man, all of whom she had murdered at their birth, and with Yapp’s assistance had buried their bodies at separate spots beneath the floor of the brewhouse and barn adjoining her cottage. These horrid confessions seemed, from their unexampled atrocity, to be more like the ravings of delirium than truth; but upon information being given to the police, and a search being made in the spots indicated by the unnatural woman, the skeletons of her six murdered offspring were all found, and stamped truth upon a tale too horrid else for belief. Upon this, Yapp was taken into custody, and a policeman, we believe, remained to take charge of the woman, who repeated her confession to her sister, and afterwards to the policeman Fowler. The circumstances being communicated to John Cooke, Esq. coroner, a warrant was issued for summoning a jury to hold an inquest. By this time, however, the woman Frances Bennett, had recovered in a measure the hardihood of her character, and on the inquest, which was held on Tuesday last, she positively denied that she had ever given birth to any children, except to two which she bore to her late husband, and which were alive now; and she, moreover, in the strongest manner, protested that she had never made any communication such as that above stated, either to her sister, to the policeman Fowler, or to the clergyman, the Rev. Mr. Formby. The latter gentleman was examined by the coroner, and deposed as above; and he further admitted that the woman had subsequently made further disclosures and confessions to him,* but as they were made to him in his spiritual capacity he must decline to divulge them!* And though the rev. gentleman had taken the usual oath before the coroner to "tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth," he nevertheless resisted in declining to give in evidence what the woman had stated to him. This conduct on the part of a Protestant clergyman of the Established Church, which is certainly somewhat singular, and we apprehend not quite recognised by the laws of the country, astonished both the coroner and the jury. We know that in the Roman Catholic priesthood the secrets of the confessional are held to be sacred, and very properly so, since the minister enters into a previous solemn engagement never to divulge them, and the communications are made in full faith in the inviolability of that engagement, and solely for a spiritual purpose, that of receiving absolution; but Protestant clergymen have no reservation of that kind to plead, and the whole truth with them must mean all that they know upon the particular subject. After, without effect, endeavouring to prevail upon Mr. Formby to state all that the woman had told him, and after the unavailing remonstrances against withholding of evidence, the coroner left the point as it stood, and passed on to the examination of the sister of Frances Bennett, whose evidence was to the effect that on Saturday last, the 29th October, she was with her sister, who had been in a weak state of health for some time and had been confined to her bed for about a week; that before Mr. Formby called, her sister made an alarm and exclaimed that she would have her dead children dug up and buried in the church-yard. She said that she delivered herself of the children over a pan of water, and that immediately the infants were born she held them under the water till they were dead, and that then she and Yapp buried them. She added that the last of the six children was not served in this way, but lived for two days; that it was weakly and she gave it some arsenic and it died; that Yapp was very sorry when he found this child was dead, and said he would not have lost it for fifty pounds; and that they both together buried the child in the brewhouse.—At this stage of the proceedings it was thought advisable to adjourn the inquiry, in order to afford opportunity for further and more deliberate inquiry into the circumstances of this mysterious and very extraordinary case; and the inquest was accordingly adjourned till Wednesday next.

One of the strange features in this case is that the sister, who resides next door to Frances Bennett, states that she never suspected the latter to be in the family way; nor does it appear that any of the other female neighbours ever expressed any suspicions of the kind. And thus for about the last eight years, according to her own statement, had this unnatural and monstrous woman been almost yearly in the constant practice of giving birth to and murdering a child without incurring any suspicion; and it was only from the compunctions of her own overladen guilty conscience, in what she no doubt supposed to be the dread hour of death, that the horrid tragedy above narrated was disclosed to the world.

This woman, Frances Bennett, we understand, is the widow of a man named Bennett, who at his death left her his property, but with the absurd, and in this case mischievous proviso, that if ever she married again the property should pass from her. This stipulation probably was the cause of her cohabiting with Yapp, instead of being married to him, and may also have been the remote inducement which led to the multiplied murders of which she acknowledged herself to have been guilty. From our inquiries, we gather that poverty could not have been the motive to such unnatural conduct, as she and Yapp were, for persons in a labouring class, in easy circumstances, Their cottage is well furnished, and has every appearance of comfort. The occurrence, we need hardly say, has created a great sensation in the neighbourhood, and various rumours are afloat.

Further disclosures in this most foul and most unnatural case are looked for with much anxiety; and it is hoped that the scruples which the Rev. Mr. Formby felt as to giving his evidence will, at the next assembling of the jury be removed, more especially, as we believe there can be no doubt that by a continued refusal to give legitimate evidence, he may render himself amenable to unpleasant consequences. With regard to the wretched woman herself, who has been the author of this frightful tragedy, we understand she appears to be between forty and fifty years of age, and that her illness is of a very serious character, so much so as to lead to the opinion that she will not recover.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000181/18421112/020/0007
Sheffield Independent - Saturday 12 November 1842
SIX INFANTS MURDERED BY THEIR MOTHER (Abridgod from a Gloucester Paper of Saturday.)

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18421112/023/0003
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 12 November 1842

FOREST OF DEAN. The Extraordinary Charge of Child-Murder in the Forest of Dean.— The adjourned inquiry into the mysterious and horrible cases of wholesale child-murder Kuardeaii, In the Forest of Dean, the particulars of which published last week, was resumed on Wednesday last, before John Cooke, Esq. coroner, and in the presence of several of the magistrates of the district. The evidence adduced was similar to that to which we adverted last week, and no new fact of a material nature transpired. The jury expressed an opinion that if further time were allowed, additional evidence might probably be obtained, and the inquest was consequently again adjourned till Wednesday next, the 16th inst. In the meantime, Thomas Yapp continues in custody, and a policeman also remains in the house where the tragedy was committed, in order to take charge the woman, Frances Bennett, who continues in the same state of ill-health which we reported last week. [The *Times* of Thursday devotes an article to the discussion of the question, of how far the clergyman to whom the woman under the tortures of troubled conscience made certain horrid disclosures, is bound to communicate what she told him. The *Times* arrives at the conclusion that he is not called upon to disclose what was communicated him under such circumstances. We will refer to the arguments in our next]

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000348/18421123/004/0003
Taunton Courier and Western Advertiser - Wednesday 23 November 1842

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000425/18421125/035/0004
Cork Examiner - Friday 25 November 1842

[syndicated widely] eg
- https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18421121/027/0004 Morning Post - Monday 21 November 1842

THE CHILD MURDERS IN THE FOREST OF DEAN. The inquiry into the unparalleled case of the alleged murder of six infants successively by their mother, at Ruardeanhill, in the Forest of Dean, terminated on Wednesday last, before John Cooke, Esq., coroner. Several magistrates of the district attended the inquest. Four or five additional witnesses were examined on Wednesday, but with the exception of one, their evidence was not materially important for the ends of justice, inasmuch as there were already abundant facts and circumstances making a too clear case against the wretched woman, Frances Bennett; and the only part of the case which, in a legal point of view, was at all defective was, the question how far the evidence made out the criminality of the man, Thomas Yapp, it being a rule of law that the confession of a criminal is not good against an accomplice except it be corroborated by other testimony. In this instance there is, of course, circumstantial corroboration in the facts of Thomas Yapp living with the woman for the last ten or twelve years, the period during which this long list of murders was perpetrated; as also the finding of the skeletons of the numerous murdered infants in the unhallowed graves where the unnatural mother states that she, with Yapp's assistance, deposited them. On Wednesday last, we understand, another link, connecting him in some degree with the female prisoner, and with a knowledge of her situation at the time when she gave birth to the last of her victims, was supplied under rather singular circumstances. It seems that about last Christmas a person named Watkins, who was known to Yapp, was in the neighbourhood of Ruardean; that Yapp invited him to remain and sleep at the house occupied by him and the female prisoner; that Watkins accepted the invitation, and occupied during the night the same bed as Thomas Yapp, while the female prisoner, Frances Bennett, slept by herself in an adjoining room; that about twelve o'clock at night and from that time till between two and three, the witness heard a suppressed moaning, as of a person in pain, in Frances Bennett's room; that this noise kept him awake for a long time, but at last he dropped off to sleep, and heard nothing more till about five o'clock, when Thomas Yapp got up and went down stairs to get a light, and appeared to be searching for matches, which he said he could not find; that he then returned up stairs and went into Frances Bennett's room, but how long he remained there this witness could not tell, as he again fell asleep and heard no more. This witness, it appears, on Saturday last, again came to Ruardean, and saw the prisoner Frances Bennett, who, in conversation, asked him if he remembered sleeping there last Christmas? He replied that he did; upon which she added, "I deceived you all nicely that night; for that was the very time when my last child was born." The jury, after maturely considering the evidence, returned a verdict of "Wilful murder" against the mother Frances Bennett, as principal, and against Thomas Yapp as accessary; and the coroner issued his warrant for the committal of both prisoners to the county gaol, to take their trial at the next assizes. In pursuance of this warrant, Thomas Yapp, on Thursday morning, and Frances Bennett, in the evening, were brought in custody to this city, and received into the county gaol. Yapp, who has latterly followed the business of an hallier, is about thirty-four years of age, and has the appearance of an illiterate and sullen man. The woman is apparently at least ten years older, and continues in a very weak state ot health, her illness being supposed to be of a consumptive nature; but a surgeon's certificate was given that she was capable of being removed, and there are reports in the neighbourhood that her present indisposition arises from her being again in a situation likely to become a mother. The discovery of these extraordinary and horrible occurrences has created a great sensation in the secluded district of Ruardean.—*Gloucestershite Chronicle.*

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001670/18421203/055/0004
Warwick and Warwickshire Advertiser - Saturday 03 December 1842
THE MURDERS AT RUARDEAN. Gloucester, Saturday.— Few occurrences have excited a more painful interest in this quarter than the investigation which terminated in the committal of Frances Bennett from Ruardean, in the Forest of Dean, to the County Gaol in this city, to await her trial at the assizes. The circumstances have been stated, and are shortly these:—Frances Bennett, after the death of her husband, by whom she had several children, lived with man named Yapp, a hauler, the children by marriage having gone to live elsewhere. About a month ago Bennett, under the apprehension that she was about to die, made a disclosure to a clergyman, in the presence of several persons, to the effect that she had had six children by Yapp, but none of them had been allowed to live, she having suffocated them immediately after birth. She told where the remains of the bodies would be found. The latest murder, according to the confession of the woman, was perpetrated about Christmas last year, and the spot which she indicated as containing the remains was found on examination to conceal the most perfect skeleton of any. The truth of this horrid confession having in this way been placed beyond a doubt, information was sent to John Cooke, Esq., one of the County Coroners, who instantly proceeded from Gloucester to Ruardean to institute an investigation. The witnesses examined on the inquest consisted chiefly of persons to whom the woman had made the confession, including the clergyman who had communicated with the Magistrate on the subject, and the person who had found the remains of the bodies. In the course of the examination of the clergyman by the Coroner, it came out that he had had a second interview with the wretched woman, none being present but themselves, and that she had made some additional disclosures. The rev. gentleman, however, on the ground that what he was told upon this occasion was mixed up with his "spiritual" duties, refused to communicate any particulars, although pressed to so by the Coroner. The woman, moreover, began to deny that she had made any such confession as that sworn to by the witnesses; but enough had been proved to justify the Jury in returning a verdict of wilful murder against Bennett and her paramour Yapp. The latter was instantly removed to Gloucester, but the state of Bennett's health was such as to induce the Coroner to delay the order for her removal till it could be effected without danger.

On the afternoon of Thursday, the 17th instant, the miserable woman arrived as the county gaol in a fly, attended by Mr. Bird, a medical man. She was carried up stairs to the hospital, and on being placed on the bed, said, "Now I will die happy." She died early on Friday morning. This day (Saturday) an inquest was held on the body, before John Cooke, Esq., the Coroner, who conducted the investigation at Ruardean. Disease had reduced the body to a perfect skeleton, but the appearance of the features was more pleasing than otherwise. Mr. Cooke, who saw the deceased alive about three weeks ago, remarked that her face had undergone little change.

The first witness examined was Elisa Gansmore, one of the nurses attached to tbe gaol, who stated that she was directed to wait upon deceased shortly after her arrival. Deceased often thanked God that she had been removed, and said that she was much happier in gaol than at home.

The Coroner here stated that a rumour was abroad that the deceased was in the family way, and asked the witness if she could speak to the point?—The witness stated that she asked the question of deceased, and she stated that she was not. Deceased said that she was only 38 years of age.

Maria Nuttal, another nurse, was next examined. She said that she was present when the deceased died on Friday morning, and was with her for some days previous. She asked witness to read and pray to her. Sometimes when she was reading the deceased would say, "Stop; wait till I'm better," and when she recovered she would ask her to go on. As her death approached she seemed to feel contented. She was sensible to the last. She said that she had been ill for about twelve months.

Mr. Hickes, tbe surgeon, stated that the complaint of which the deceased died was pulmonary consumption, and, in his opinion, the removal from Ruardean had neither injured nor benefited her. She seemed to be aware that she could survive only for a few days. She mentioned to him and to others that she had been sent to gaol charged with the murder of her children.

The Jury returned a verdict of "Died from natural causes."

Yapp, on being told of the death of Bennett, wept bitterly. The body was buried the relatives of the deceased.

As to worldly means, the murderers were comfortable. Indeed it is alleged that the only index to their brutal conduct is be found in the circumstauce that Bennett's husband settled his property upon her, but with the restriction that should she marry again the property was to go to his children. It was the desire to retain the property which probably prevented her marriage with Yapp, and every body knows how one crime leads to another.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000077/18421204/019/0008
Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper - Sunday 04 December 1842

THE CHILD MURDERS IN THE FOREST OF DEAN.-DEATH OF THE MURDERESS. We last week announced the committal of Frances Bennett to our county gaol on the charge of murdering her six infant children. We have now to record that the doom, the apprehension of which terrified her into the disclosures which made public her unnatural and unparalleled attr

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000090/18421203/046/0013
Northern Star and Leeds General Advertiser - Saturday 03 December 1842
THE LATE WHOLESALE INFANTICIDE IN THE FOREST OF DEAN. DEATH OF FRANCES BENNETT, THE MURDERER OF HER CHILDREN. GLOUCESTER,

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000082/18421121/018/0004
Morning Chronicle - Monday 21 November 1842


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18430408/037/0003
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 08 April 1843

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000311/18430420/020/0004
Cheltenham Chronicle - Thursday 20 April 1843

GLOUCESTER SPRING ASSIZES. (Continued from last week's Paper.) CROWN COURT. Wednesday, April 12. Child Murders at Ruardean. *Thomas Yapp*, aged 34. charged on the coroner's inquisition with having been accessory to the wilful murder of several infant children, under circumstances already well known, was discharged. Mr. Francillon, on behalf of the prosecution, stated that after an anxious consideration of the case he had resolved not to offer evidence.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000401/18430421/008/0002
Shrewsbury Chronicle - Friday 21 April 1843

Gloucester Assizes.— ... In the case of Yapp, the paramour of Frances Bennett, the woman who, under the tortures of a guilty conscience, confessed that she had murdered six of their infants, it was expected that moch of the "horrible" would have been developed. The death, however, of the woman had changed the aspect of the case as regarded the accessory, and the able lawyer who was entrusted with the prosecution resolved to abandon the case. The prisoner was consequently discharged.
