# Ross on Wye

From Tim:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lord_Saltoun_and_Auchanachie cf old Maid's walk
https://mainlynorfolk.info/nic.jones/songs/annachiegordon.html



See also monmouthshire_tales.md


Murder and Riot in the Forest of Dean

Cunning Folk and Highwaymen of the Forest of Dean

---

--

---
TO DO

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003883/18660908/012/0002
Leeds Evening Express - Saturday 08 September 1866

A Tale of the Forest of Dean

The Forest of Dean belongs to Her Most Gracious Majesty, and is situated in the western district of Gloucestershire. It is about twenty miles long, and ten broad. Its wealth consists in productive coal and iron mines, stone quarries, and majestic oaks. One portion of this forest, abutting on the Wye, abounds in woodland scenes of tranquil beauty; another portion, stretching to the Severn, is bolder, and, as the Guide Books would say, more romantic "in its features." It was near the Severn that I lived when the events occured around me which I intend to narrate.

For many years the Forest of Dean was grossly neglected; its timber was cut down and no young trees were planted to fill up the vacancies. This system was carried so far, that, in my father's young days, large portions of the country nominally forest were completely without trees. Upon such treeless portions, or wherever else they chose, the neighbouring farmers considered themselves perfectly entitled to encroach. Some had actually enclosed for themselves portions of the royal property, and built cottages thereon, into which no constable ever walked to inquire by what right this unauthorised squatting took place. Acres, by the hundred, of forest land, having been thus appropriated, the district swarmed with population. Any cottager possessing pigs or sheep, cattle or donkies, turned his dumb dependents out into the forest, where they found free commons in its grassy nooks, as freely and unhesitatingly as if their owners' rights were enrolled on parchment, and had been bought with lawful money.

The Government decided that a check should be put on these proceedings, and determined to enclose the forest. Discontent accordingly prevailed among the foresters. At the Speech House—in the centre of the forest, and from time immemorial the forum of the district—meetings were held. While foresters denounced the Government proceeding, Government proceeded with its work. Trespassing sheep and cattle were impounded; if any rash adventurer commenced the building of a cottage within the royal ground, its walls were "tumbled." The enclosures were completed, while the foresters bewailed, or threatened in the Speech House, with about as much chance of what the speakers were pleased to call "redress," as a vagrant has, when he threatens appeal against the decision of the magistrate.

Mrs Winifred Kear was among those who were affected by the Government proceedings. By profession she was an ash-burner—in other words, a humble manufacturer of alkali; a term, however, which she has never heard in her life. She cut down fern, burned it, and from the ashes, with the aid of water, kneaded a substance into little round balls, which she sold to the surrounding housewives, for the purpose of softening the water in their tubs on washingdays. Out of the ashes of a vast number of ferns, with frugality to aid her in her alchemy, she had extracted a few pieces of gold, and with those she had built a little cottage, enclosing round it a quite liberal allowance of the royal ground, which she had made into a garden. She had also bred some sheep of a small hardy breed, producing very fine wool—a breed, I believe, peculiar to our forest. She had also a cow, who was a member, in fact, of Winny's family, and was accustomed to come "but and ben," as inclination led her. Winny's cottage was built in accordance with the architectural design to which our forest cottages in general conform. It had four rooms, two on the ground-floor and two above for the main part, with a back-kitchen as appendix. There was no lack of gay flowers in the garden, and Winny had not omitted to lay the foundations of an orchard. A vine grew over the cottage wall, and there was a jessamine that climbed over the green wooden porch, but it was not Winny that planted that. At any rate, I do not think it was, for all the neighbours said that Winny was a witch. When I was a young and lusty man she was an old tottering creature—not the woman, I think, to plant jessamine about her door. Jack Prosser, her factotum, never planted it, I'm sure. He was a wild Orson of a fellow. Went about with his hairy chest exposed, and no hat on his shaggy penthouse; which could be distinguished only by its anatomical position as a head of hair. No storm ever wetted Jack Prosser to the scalp; and his thick dirty hands, I am quite sure, never could have planted jessamine. Mary Llewellyn planted it when she was an orphan child. Now she is the mother of a fine young man who attends medical lectures at University College, and comes home to the forest in vacation time, to turn his nose up at the ignorance of me, his father.

Mary lived in the time I tell you of, with Winny Kear, who was her mother's mother. Winny petted her preposterously. I did not think so then, but I do now. I frequently remark to Mrs Wyville, that a little rougher usage from her grandmother in early life would have been a great blessing to both of us. As a damsel, Mary was extremely pastoral. In the morning she arose, milked her cow, Truelove, and placed the milk in bright tin pans to cream. Then she had breakfast, went to pay attentions to the sheep, returned home again, and then went to the well for water. At the well it was a daily accident that I should chance to meet her. Having quarrelled with me there, she would go home, tuck up her sleeves, and play at cook till dinner time. After dinner she would decorate herself and go to the next village, shopping, if she could find anything to want, and had any money left to buy it with. Then she came home, and spent the evening in sewing and knitting; or in dancing, when it was a gala time and dances were afoot. I suppose that is how forest maidens usually live.

Now, in the opinion of the foresters, Jack Prosser was an able man. These good people are exclusively known to one another by some nickname, and Jack Prosser's nickname was the "Counsellor." Winny Kear being a witch, it was fair to suppose her man a gifted person; therefore Jack Prosser was the forest counsellor, the village Hampden, and so on. The result of forest meetings came at length in the shape of a decision that the banks of the enclosures should be levelled, and the forest once again thrown open. Of this movement Mr Prosser was appointed leader.

On the 10th of May, 18—, Mr Prosser attempted to wash his face and hands, to the intense astonishment of Miss Llewellyn, before whom he appeared in a mottled condition, as she sat knitting under an apple-tree. There is no doubt whatever, now, that Jack chuckled, and scratched his head. Mr Prosser made a declaration of affection, in short; but his manner was so mysterious, his words were so unutterable, that although he left Miss Llewellyn under the impression that he had proposed himself her future husband, and that he had been accepted as such; the lady herself had not the smallest suspicion of the purport of his declaration. It was not, in fact, until Jack had gone off in a state of rapture, and until Mary began to reflect, that the idea of Jack's "intentions" entered her imagination. She resolved, however, to take an early opportunity of undeceiving him.

Now it was Whitsuntide, and Whitsuntide is the great holiday season in the Forest of Dean. A very pleasant season, too, it is for anybody living in a forest, when the trees put on their first fresh leaves, and the orchards are in blossom, and the hawthorn too; when birds are making up for their long silence, and the bees again are busy. In the Forest of Dean every hamlet has, at this season, its wake or village festival; and morris-dancing is the business of life. Every morris-dancer throws aside his coat and waistcoat, to display a shirt covered with party-coloured ribbons twisted into rosettes for him by his sweetheart. Happy the maid who has decked out her lover with the gayest finery; she loves to see her ribbons glorified. Then the dancers put themselves on feathers also, and hang bells about their knees. The foremost dancer wields a flag on which are inscribed the initials of the district to which his morris belongs. Our dancing-ground was Blakeney Hill. That hill is green to the summit, and its sides are covered with cottage gardens, and were then gay and sweet with apple-blossom. From the top you see the Severn parted from you by narrow dells and orchards, with Blakeney village set in the rustic picture like a black-bird's egg in a green nest of moss. On the top of this hill is a level platform, where has been always held the Blakeney Hill wake. To this wake all the different forest districts used to send forth their sets of morris-dancers; each set had its own dancing-ground, and you might see twenty or thirty companies, of forty or more couples, all tripping it at one time merrily.

On the 10th of May, 18—, I walked with Mary Llewellyn to this wake, soon after her interview with Mr Prosser. Mary was very joyous; we wandered, I may say, scampered, to and fro; the distant fiddles and the tinkling of the morris-bells possibly made me sentimental. I twined some wild flowers into a true love-knot, and offered them to Miss Llewellyn; she blushed, and put the flowers in her bosom. I offered her my arm, on which she put her hand for the first time. My future fate as a domestic man was sealed. I liked the notion then; it was a happy one: and when we reached the wake, I led Mary to the top of the Etloe set of morris-dancers and I believe we danced to the astonishment of all beholders; for we were both glad, and our hearts were dancing.

Thereupon presently came Mr. Prosser to claim Mary for a dance. Mary was tired, and there followed a few words of explanation, which begot no friendship towards me from Mr Jack. When we came home, Farmer Grimes solemnly warned me against "being too sweet upon Polly Llewellyn," because she was a witch's grandchick, and the old woman had caused his wagon to stick for two hours in a rut opposite her cottage. I pooh-poohed Father Grimes, who, consequently, considered me a doomed lad.

Two miles from Lydney rises a bold table-land called the Bailey; a wild, heath-like place, commanding fine views of the Severn, the neighbourhood of Park End, and the picturesque woodland church of St. Paul's. The Bailey itself looks wild and desolate; there you have holly-trees and furze-bushes; and there we had, in July 18—, a meeting of some thousand foresters. Every district of the forest had sent to the general muster a supply of men with spades and pickaxes; yea, verily, and some with swords and muskets, that gave no very military look to warriors in smock-frocks, velveteens, and hob-nailed shoes. Counsellor Prosser addressed the assembly. Farmer Grimes wanted to know whether they would throw the banks down, in case soldiers came? The resolution passed in answer to Farmer Grimes's query was to the effect, that if the soldiers—a regiment or so—did come, the banks were to be allowed to stand; but, if the military force were small, and the foresters could overcome it, the fences were to be demolished. The foresters then separated into several detachments, each under its leader, and each appointed to destroy a certain part of the embankments. The rattle of spades and pickaxes shortly resounded; the levelling of every bank was celebrated with cheers remorselessly noisy, and serious alarm spread through the surrounding country. It was reported that the forest was in complete insurrection; that men regularly drilled and armed possessed the almost inaccessible recesses; and that Robin Hood did nothing in comparison with what was to be expected from the men of Dean.

Having razed the embankments, the bold foresters turned loose their cattle upon the forbidden ground; formed an encampment upon a rough ridge, called Putnage; and sent round detachments to exact contributions from adjacent villages and farms. The alarmed neighbours paid the black-mail. The local authorities swore in a multitude of special constables, and sent to London for the military. Sure enough, down the soldiers came.

The forest army under General Jack Prosser looked like a gipsy camp. The moment the camp was formed, the General thought the victory was won, and proceeded at once to sit down in peaceful triumph upon his laurels; the very way to crush them. The enemy, consisting of a goodly array of the troops in the pay of Her Most Gracious Majesty came into the forest, expecting a vigorous resistance from men armed to the teeth, and opposing their breasts fanatically to the bayonet. The regulars were, however, grievously deceived. The insurgents did not wait even to discover what the smell of gunpowder was like, but scampered off at the first sound of the drum and fife.

Now, I had pretty hotly joined the movement, because it concerned very closely the fortunes of Mrs Winny Kear, the grandmother of the sweetheart of my bosom, and the capital encroacher upon the public land. Being sound in wind and limb, and young in blood, I endeavoured to oppose myself to timid counsel, and to stir up the foresters to fight.

"A spy!" cried Mr Prosser; "he is bribed to get us into trouble. Lay hold of him."

They did lay hold of me; they tied me, gagged me, and dragged me off. Mr Prosser's motive was revenge; and the foresters of Little Dean, who had got hold of me, being the roughest men of our community, carried the business a little to extremes. They took me to a coal-pit, which had been recently deserted, and sent me down there by the windlass. The man who went down with me discharged me at the bottom like rubbish from the basket, and was wound up again.

This might have been, and would have been a case of murder, if it were possible for a dozen countrymen to know a secret, and for none of them to leave it behind him at an alehouse. At eleven o'clock that night, Mary Llewellyn, who had sought me since noon, like a loving little soul, obtained a mere hint of my whereabouts. She knocked up Farmer Grimes who had been then two hours in bed, coaxed him to go with her into the rain, and let her down the pit. He went with her and let her down; he could not go himself, because she would not have relied upon her strength to wind him up again. She came down with a lantern, found me, and put brandy between my lips —then put something much sweeter upon my lips. After I got out of that pit, I lost no time in getting into another; we were married in Blakeney Church.—Well, well. Away with melancholy!

Several leaders of the forest outbreak having been taken and tried, their Commander-in-Chief, Mr Posser, among others, went abroad. The cases of old Mrs Winny Kear and others who had built cottages thoughtlessly on royal ground, were mercifully dealt with by the Government, and leases were granted to them at a peppercorn rent for various terms, according to the length of time the several encroachments had existed. Winny fell asleep in peace, when death arrived to do for her what she had been doing all her life;—to gather her for ashes. I cannot say that since then *I* have lived in peace. But I am happy.

Also in 
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000336/18690522/012/0006
Leeds Times - Saturday 22 May 1869

Literature

A Tale of the Forest of Dean

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001243/18720808/075/0006
Tadcaster Post, and General Advertiser for Grimstone - Thursday 08 August 1872

Literature

A Tale of the Forest of Dean

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18691002/019/0003
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 02 October 1869

A Dean Forest Love Story

---
witches elsewhwre

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000328/18480921/019/0004
North Devon Journal - Thursday 21 September 1848

Another Old Betty

```{admonition} Witchcraft in Warwickshire — trial for murder, December 1875
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18751218/036/0005
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 18 December 1875

WITCHCRAFT IN WARWICKSHIRE.

EXTRAORDINARY TRIAL FOR MURDER.

At the Warwick winter assists on Wednesday, before Baron Bramwell, James Haywood, 45, a half-witted farm labourer, was indicted for having murdered Ann Tennant, at Long Compton (Warwickshire, near the border of Gloucestershire), on the 5th of September. Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Chamberlayne were for the prosecution, and Mr. Buszard, at the request of the Judge, defended.

John Tennant, a labourer, living at Long Compton, said he would be seventy-nine years of age "come Christmas-day." The deceased was his wife, and "come April next" she would have been eighty years of age. She was in good health on the evening of the day named, and went out to get some bread and tea. When she was returning she met with "this 'ere customer." His father and mother always "harboured this 'ere about witches," and would frequently say, "They are at the boy again; they won't let him alone." By that they meant that the witches were at the prisoner. There was nothing in it.—In cross-examination, witness said that the prisoner was always a curious sort of hand in the village. He always wanted more money for his work than other people, and yet he was not a skilful hand. He was not considered to be quite right by the farmers. Witness had heard that prisoner had been injured in his head, but could not say whether it was true. He was a man who would drink any quantity of gin or liquor that could be put before him, and then he would go mad after. Prisoner never told him that his inside was full of witches, and that they were killing him.

John Evans, a boy of fifteen, said on the evening of the date named he and another boy were walking with the prisoner from a field in which he had been working that day. Prisoner had a fork and a bottle in his hand. As they were walking "to and fro" they met the deceased. Prisoner stuck the fork into her legs three times. He told witness that there were many witches in Long Compton, and he would kill two of them, Betsy Ford and Betsy Hughes. Cross-examined, the witness said the fork was the one the prisoner had been at work with that day. He was looked upon by the boys of the village as a "sort of witch man."—To the Judge: I go to school. I don't believe in witchcraft.

James Taylor, farmer, at Long Compton, stated that while he was in his orchard he heard a cry in the road, "Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Oh dear, Oh!" Witness went into the road, and saw the prisoner knock the poor old lady down with a fork. Witness rescued the deceased. Prisoner said there were fifteen or sixteen witches in the village, and he had killed one of them. He had known the prisoner for a long time. He was a man who knew how to take work by the piece, and also how to do it.— Mr. Dugdale: As a general farm labourer, and as an ordinary man, what do you say of him?— Witness: Well, I think he was rather strange sometimes, he was a man who knew how to take a job, and how to do it. He was rather strange about "familiar spirits." He said they had been haunting him for three hours that day.—Mr. Buszard: He was looked upon as a strange man in the village?—Not particularly so. When he had beer he was wild and excitable. He told me that the witches were working inside him. I was told that he had been to consult a "wise man" at Coughten.—Mr. Buszard: Did not the village people look upon him as a wild sort of man?—Witness: No, he was as right as you or me when he had no beer (laughter).—Mr. Buszard: Well, I must say, I must decline the test for myself (renewed laughter).—Witness said he believed there was one-third of the people in the village who believed in withcraft. He did not believe in it himself.—The Judge: I should think you need not deny anything so utterly absurd.—Witnese (to the Judge): There were many persons in the village whom he knew to be popularly regarded as witches. They were all old women, and mostly widows. He did not know an instance of a young woman or a sick old woman being suspected of being a witch.

Elizabeth Hughes, a decently-dressed woman, was next sworn. As soon as she appeared the prisoner became excited, and called out "There is another witch there." One of the warders here stopped him, but the Judge interfered and wished him to go on. The prisoner, however, made no further remark, but kept his eyes fixed on the witness for several minutes.

The witness went on to say that the deceased was her mother, and that the affair took place in the road a short distance from her residence. Hearing a scream she went into the road, and found her mother lying un the ground bleeding. Mr. Taylor was standing by, holding the prisoner, who exclaimed "I have done it; I have done it. I meant to do it. There are several more I will serve the same." Her mother died shortly after.

To Mr. Buszard—I have heard him talk about witches, but I never took any notice of him, he was so full of wickedness. I have heard him say the witches were tormenting him. He said to me once that I had better keep from the old women, else they would make me a witch as bad as themselves. I told him I did not believe such nonsense.

P.C. Simpson, who arrived on the spot immediately after the deceased had been stabbed, took the prisoner into custody. He said "I must take you to the lockup, and I am afraid you have killed that old woman." Prisoner said "It's no odds about it. I hope she is dead. There's a lot more I shall serve the same. There is fourteen or fifteen more." He said that they had kept him for three hours in the beans that day. Witness considered that he was under the influence of drink, as on his way to the station prisoner looked up twice and said "Who are you? Are you a policeman?"

In cross-examination witness said—I feel sure there are many people in Long Compton who believe in witchcraft. The prisoner was weirdly a quiet sort of man. Many of the people in the village who believed in witchcraft attended places of worship. I cannot say that the prisoner attended any place of worship, but I know his father and mother do.

Supt. Thompson, of Shipston, said that while the pthemer was in his custody he told him Mrs. Tennant was dead, and the charge was one of murder. He said "Dead?" Witness replied "Yee." Prisoner said "Well, I did not kill her outright." Witness told him to be careful, as what he said would be given in evidence against him. Prisoner replied "Then we will not have anything the matter." The next morning prisoner said he should like witness to see the water in the jug, where he could see the witches if he was bewitched.

To Mr. Buszard—He ilid not appear to realise his position, nor to be conscious that he had done wrong.

Mr. Hutchinson, surgeon at Long Compton, proved that death resulted from several varicose veins having been punctured, causing great loss of blood and shock to the system. Had known the prisoner for many years. His manner was peculiar, but his conversation rational.

To Mr. Dugdale—I attribute his peculiarity to deafness. He was sane enough on every subject I ever conversed with him upon.

This concluded the case for the Crown, and Mr. Buszard called the following witnesses, previous to making his speech.

Mr. J. Mills Anderson, governor of the County Gaol, said he had had frequent opportunities of observing the prisoner since he had been in the prison. His general conduct was that of a very eccentric man, but he was pretty shrewd on some subjects. He knew what he had done, but he justified his act by pointing to several passages in the Bible relative to the subject of witches. On one occasion witness saw him in his cell, when he said that he could convince him of the truth of witchcraft if he had an opportunity of doing so. Witness replied "Very well; what do you want?" Prisoner said if he were supplied with a jug and a small file, and witness would see him in the morning, then he would prove that he was bewitched. Witness supplied him with these things, and saw him in the morning. The prisoner then held up a small glass bottle of water, half full, and, pointing to an air bubble which was floating on the surface of the water, said that was proof that he was bewitched. Witness understood prisoner to say that he had been and consulted a "wise man" on this subject, and he had told him that he was possessed. Prisoner said that the deceased had met her eyes upon him, and it was only necessary for her to do that in order to bewitch him if she was wicked enough. Witches had power to possess people in that way. He said that he had never been well since the deceased had set her eyes upon him, and never been able to do a good day's work. He said it was his duty to kill the woman. He did not seem to regard what he had dune required justification. At one time he said he should not have done it if he had not been in beer. He was aware that he stood in some peril, because a few days ago he offered to give witness a sovereign to get him off.

To Mr. Buszard—The passages in the Scriptures to which he referred for justification were the 8th chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and the 9th to the 11th verses; the 5th chapter of Micah, 12th and 13th verses; and the 27th verse of the 20th chapter of Leviticus.

In accordance with a suggestion made by the Judge, a Bible woe procured and the following read:—"A man, also, or woman that hath a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death; they shall stone them with stone; their blood shall be upon them."— Leviticus xx., and 27th verse.

The Judge—Did he seem to consider there were passages in the Bible which warranted anybody in doing what he had done?

Witness—That was my impression.

Dr. Parry, superintendent of the County Lunatic Asylum, said he had had two interviews with the prisoner. He was a man of generally feeble character and badly developed head, which, in conjunction with congenital deafness and impediment of speech, marked him as a man of very weak intellect. He took a childish interest in the most trifling matters, and was most demonstrative. He was labouring under a strong delusion on the subject of witchcraft, and had applied the subject to his own case with such intensity of purpose that he was not responsible for what he did in connection with that subject. Witness did not give a certificate for his removal to the lunatic asylum because he had not been tried, and if he once entered a lunatic asylum the case was so confirmed he would never come out again. Witness, therefore, thought it was best he should take his trial first.

Mr. Munn, surgeon at the County Gaol, confirmed the evidence of the previous witnesses.

The jury acquitted the prisoner on the ground of insanity, and he was ordered to be kept in custody during her Majesty's pleasure.

```

----
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18360601/002/0002
Hereford Journal - Wednesday 01 June 1836

Shocking Murder in the Forest of Dean.— A powerful sensation has been produced the Forest of Dean, by the murder a labourer named Philip Cooke, under the following circumstances.— It appears that the deceased, who lived at the Cross Ways, near Coleford, and had been employed for a short time in stripping bark at Usk, was returning home on Saturday night se'nnight, when on passing through the Beaulieu Wood, he observed a woman with a child in her arms, standing by two persons who were lying on the ground. He accosted the woman, and inquired what was the matter, when she told him that the men were intoxicated. He proffered his assistance, and the men, who turned out to be Irish tinkers, and hawkers of list shoes, got up, and with his aid proceeded through the wood. On reaching Stanton, one of the Irishmen wished to have more beer, and a quarrel arose between them on the subject, in which however Cooke took no part. Cooke then said to the woman "you had better come on with me, as I shall be a better guard for you than these two fellows." He had scarcely uttered these words when the Irishmen both set upon him and beat him dreadfully, trampling upon him when down with hobnailed shoes. At last they left off, and Cook got up and made the best of his way towards Coleford. The men loitered and then pursued him, keeping his pace. It was nearly twelve o'clock when the party arrived at the Cross Ways, where Cooke lived. The latter went into his house, put down his things, and then ran and called a man of the name of Henry Yorke and another named Jordon, the turnpike keeper. Yorke got up, followed his wife, and came into the road at the time when the Irish party were passing through the turnpike. The woman cried out, "what are you going to beat the old man for?"— to which Yorke replied that he was not going to beat any one. During this time Cooke stood with his hands crossed in the middle of the road, and Yorke demanded why they had been beating Cooke; on this the Irishwoman whispered to one of the men to get a stone, when he retired a pace or two back, where there was a broken stone fence, and taking two large slate stones in either hand advanced upon Cooke, saying, "I'll split thy skull for thee;" he instantly flung one of the stones with all his force, and struck the unfortunate man on the temple. Cooke dropped, apparently dead; and Jordan and Yorke made an attempt to capture the ruffian, who declared that he would serve them in the same manner if they came near him. They followed him down to a lodging-house between the Cross-Ways and Coleford, into which he entered, but escaped by the back-door, and has not since been heard of. The other man and the woman were captured a few hours afterwards. Cooke lingered in a most distressing state until Thursday morning, when he expired. The stone had perforated his forehead, and the brain was only covered by a thin tegument, so that it is very surprising how he survived so long. The deceased bore an excellent character, and has left a wife and two children to lament his loss. He was about 40 years of age.

```{admonition} Reward Offered for Tinker Charged with Wilful Murder, June 1856
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18360625/027/0003
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 25 June 1836

The Murder in the Forest of Dean.— It will seen, from the following letter, that his Majesty's Government has offered a reward of one hundred pounds for the apprehension Daniel Finnigan, *alias* Dan the Tinker, who stands charged under the Coroner's warrant with "wilful murder," committed upon the body of Philip Cooke, at the Cross-Ways, near Coleford, on the night the of 21st of May last:—

Whitehall. I7th June, 1836.

Sir,—I am directed by Lord John Russell to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 1Sth instant, stating the circumstances under which a verdict of "wilful murder" has been returned agaioat Daniel Finnigan, by the Jury at an inquest held on the body of Philip Cooke; and I am to inform you that in this case a reward of *one hundred pounds* will be paid by the Government to any person who shall be the means of apprehending Daniel Finnigan and bringing him to justice. And Lord John Russell will advise the grant of his Majesty's gracious pardon to any accomplice, not having been an actual perpetrator of the murder, who shall give such evidence as shall lead to the same result.

I am. Sir, your obedient Servant, SAMUEL PHILLIPPS.

Rev. Geo. Roberts, Coleford.

```


```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003358/18360703/032/0005
Weekly Dispatch (London) - Sunday 03 July 1836

HORRID MURDERS.

Yesterday's *Hue and Cry and Police Gazette* contains offers of rewards by the Lords of His Majesty's Treasury for the apprehension of the undermentioned persons on charges of murder, &c.

...

Also a further reward of 100*l.* for the apprehension of a man named Daniel Finnaghan, *alias* Dan the Tinker, for the wilful murder of Philip Cooke, at the Crossways, near Coleford, in the Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire, on the night of the 27th ult.
```

```{admonition} Shocking Murder in the Forest of Dean, June 1836
:class: dropdown
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000912/18360604/047/0004
Cardiff and Merthyr Guardian, Glamorgan, Monmouth, and Brecon Gazette - Saturday 04 June 1836

SHOCKING MURDER IN THE FOREST OF DEAN.

A powerful sensation has been produced this week in the Forest of Dean, by the murder of a labourer named Phillip Cooke, under the following circumstances.

It appears that the deceased, who lived at the Cross Ways, near Coleford, and had been employed for a short time in stripping bark at Usk, was returning home on Saturday night last, when on passing through the Bealieu Wood, he observed a woman with a child in her arms, standing by two men who were lying_on the ground. He accosted the woman, and inquired what was the matter, when she told him that the men were intoxicated. He proffered his assistance, and the men, who turned out to be Irish tinkers, and hawkers of list shoes, got up and with his aid proceeded through the wood. On reaching Stanton, one of the Irishmen wished to have more beer, and a quarrel arose between them on the subject, in which however Cooke took no part. Cooke then said to the woman "you had better come on with me, I shall be a better guard for you than these two fellows." He had scarcely uttered these words when the Irishmen both set upon him and beat him dreadfully, trampling upon him when down with hobnailed shoes. At last they left off, and Cooke got up and made the best of his way towards Coleford. The men loitered and then pursued him, keeping his pace. It was nearly twelve o'clock when the party arrived at the Cross Ways where Cooke lived. The latter went into his house, put down his things, and then ran and called a man of the name of Henry Yorke and another named Jordan, the turnpike keeper. Yorke got up, followed by his wife, and came into the road at the time when the Irish party were passing through the turnpike. The woman cried out, "what are you going to beat the old man for?"—to which Yorke replied that he was not going to beat any one. During this time Cooke stood with his hands crossed in the middle of the road, Yorke demanded why they had been beating Cooke; on this the Irishwoman whispered to one of the men to get a stone, when he retired a pace or two back, where there was a broken stone fence, and taking two large slate stones in either hand advanced upon Cooke, saying, "I'll split thy skull for thee;" he instantly flung one of the stones with all his force and struck the unfortunate man on the temple. Cooke dropped, apparently dead; and Jordan and Yorke made an attempt to capture the ruffian, who declared that he would serve them in the same manner if they came near him. They followed him down to a lodging house between the Cross-Ways and Coleford, into which he entered but escaped by the back door, and has not since been heard of. The other man and the woman were captured a few hours afterwards. Cooke lingered in a most distressing state until Thursday morning, when he expired. The stone had perforated his forehead and the brain was only covered by a thin tegument, so that it is very surprising how he survived so long.

The deceased bore an excellent character, and has left a wife and two children to lament his loss. He was about 40 years of age.—*Gloucester Chronicle.*

A coroner's inquest has since been held and a verdict of Wilful Murder returned against the man not in custody.
```


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000365/18401010/050/0004
Carlisle Patriot - Saturday 10 October 1840

MURDER AND SUICIDE. A most dreadful murder and suicide were committed in the Forest of Dean oh Monday night, about seven o'clock, by a man of the name of Philip Willis, a foreman in the employ of Messrs. James and Co., of Sydney. Willis held the situation of underground agent in some mines in the Forest of Dean. the property of the Cinderford Iron Company, and was very comfortably off, the cottage in which he resideded, and the orchard adjoining, being his own property; he had also two houses at Bream. The unfortunate man had heen for some time in an unsound state of mind, and about six months ago he became an inmate of the lunatic asylum at Whitchurch, from which establishment he was discherged in about six weeks, with a certificate of cure. On the 10th of May last he cut his throat, but through the skilful attention of Mr. Marsh, surgeon, of Coleford, he recovered. For the last fortnight a man had always slept with him, but on Monday, his wife informed this man that she considered her hushand so much better, that she should not be afraid to occupy the same bed with him. During the whole of Monday, he was excited and nervous, seeming to he afraid of everyone who came near him, and about five o'clock on Monday evening, Willis, his wife, and daughter, a very pretty and most amiable girl, and of whom he was most doatingly fond, sat down to tea together; just before tea he kissed his child, and said. "You don't know, my dear Ann, how I love you." He also knelt duwn and prayed, as he often used to do, that the Lord would strengthen his mind. After tea the daughter went outside the cottage door, and was in the act of chopping sticks to light the fire next morning, when her father, who had taken a hacker (an instrument resembling a bill-hook), went quietly behind her, and as she stooped aimed a deadly blow at the back of her head, and buried the hacker in her skull, which was cut through in a most frightful manner. Immediately on receiving the blow she cried out "Oh, dear! oh, dear?" Her mother, hearing this, rushed out, and was met in the doorway by Willis, who attempted to cut her down. A dreadful struggle ensued between the hushand and the terror-stricken wife, in which the latter received a dreadful cut in the arm, and a deep gash was inflicted on the left shoulder, her gown and under garments were cut through, and her faced bruised, both eyes being blackened and much swollen. Whilst the struggle was going on, the poor girl (wonderful to relate) went to a neighbour's cottage, forty yards distant from the scene of blood. Mr. Marsh, of Coleforf, was soon in attendance, but she died in about an hour after having received the injury. She spoke several times, and asked why her father had not come to her? The neighbours being alarmed, ran to Mrs. Willis's assistance, who, on seeing them, exclaimed, "Run, for your lives, into the orchard; my husband is gone there." They immediately went in search of him, and, horrible to relate, found him at the foot of one of the trees, with his throat cut in a most shocking manner, his right hand grasping the razor. The poor wretch was still alive, but he died in a very few minutes after being discovered. The escape of the wife was almost miraculous, and it was a providential occurrence that his other two children were absent from home on a visit, or it is probable that they, too, would have fallen victims to his fury. His wife says he was a most excellent husband and fond father; indeed, his love for the poor girl who fell by his hand was extreme. He would not even let her go to chapel by herself, fearing she might come to harm.

Willis was fifty-two years of age, and his unfortuante daughter only seventeen.


---


Amusing aside - "devil's Chapels" in:
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000491/18310806/027/0003
Sheffield Independent - Saturday 06 August 1831
Temperance societies

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000398/18411013/024/0004

Hereford Journal - Wednesday 13 October 1841

THE IRON-MINES OF THE FOREST OF DEAN. Some of the primitive iron-mines in the Forest are great curiosities, although they easily escape the attention of a stranger, from their secluded situation, and the obscurity of their entrances. A small aperture, not unlike a fox-earth, amongst projecting masses of limestone rock, admits the miner to the scene of his labours. He descends partly by wooden pegs driven into the soil, and partly by the help of a short ladder which he carries with him, and thus arrives in the subterranean labyrinth, from which he excavates the ore. These mines arc worked by labouring men, who are "free miners" under the old Forest laws, assisted by their families; and the ore is carried to the surface by young boys, in packages called "billies," which are secured on the back, and thus secured they crawl on hands, knees, and feet, from the recesses of the mine, till they climb into daylight. The hands and knees of these poor boys are frequently perfectly hoofed; the skin being covertcd into a bony texture by continual pressure. The iron ore, lying "pockets" or "churns" as they are called by the miners, ribbed in by the limestone rock, leaves iregular passages and caverns all directions, after it has been dug out, so that the interior presents the most grotesque combinations of pillars, cells, grottoes, lofty domes, and narrow, low corridors of variously coloured limestone, the effect of which, under the partial illumination of the miners' candles, is often very imposing. This class of iron mines is now in very partial operation, in consequence of the application of capital to improved methods of mining on a larger scale.—The scene which the writer wishes to describe is the site of probably the most ancient mine-works the kingdom, and not visited so frequently as it deserves to be. It lies near the village of Bream, on the left of the turnpike-road, leading from Lydney to Coleford, and is known by the provincial appellation of "The Scowles," a name commonly applied to old mine works, and probably derived, as suggested by a learned Forest Commissioner, fron the British *Ceawl*, signifying cavern or excavation. In the recesses of a wood near some of the primitive mines, you suddenly enter upon what at first sight appears to be an extensive and confused ruin, in a deep dell, overgrown with ivy and lichen, and interspersed with lofty trees. These masses are, in reality, the limestone rock left in its natural formations after the iron ore had been carried away by the old British and Roman miners, who appear to have pursued a course of mining downwards from the surface, clearing out the superficial "churns," as far as they extended in every direction, and thus leaving cavities and elevations, to which a long course of years has given their present romantic appearance by obliterating all traces of the process, and clothing every hollow with vegetation. Tall and spreading trees flourish on the very summits of some of the natural columns that rear their lofty forms amidst this wild scene; others extend their branches over clustering rocks covered with moss and creeping plants, whilst devious paths winding their way amongst these relics of nature, exposed by art, invite the visitor's tarriance, whilst he indulges in the musing mood which such a spot is calculated to inspire. But the most singular portion of these nntique srowles is a grotesque mass of rocks, called "The Devil's Chapel," in which is a pulpit vast dimensions, appropriated by the country people to the infernal oratory of Satan, when he officiates on solemn occasions amongst his congregations of demons and witches, there assembled. In truth, it is a scene well adapted to superstitious imaginings, and to old tales of witchcraft and *diablerie*, in which the arch-demon and his earthly colleagues, celebrate their nocturnal orgies. A cloudy midnight in such a place, with glimpses of moonshine just revealing its rugged horrors, and profound shades; a fitful night-wind, and flapping boughs, with now and then the cry of an ill-omened bird, startling the ear, would soon make a susceptible imagination run wild, peopling the solitude with its unutterable visions. For my own part, in the sweet spring air, and the softened light of an April morning, the scene impressed me with no unhallowed fancies. It led back my imagination to the barbarous infancy of our now enlightened land; filled my thoughts with pictures of the past and musings on the present; with reflections on the transit of generation after generation, and across the disc of mortality, each leaving behind it contributions of knowledge and ingenuity, whilst its own final destinies are elsewhere. In the midst of my cogitation, a devotional feeling emanated, alike from their nature and the seclusion in which they originated. I referred the progressive improvement of our race in science, in art, and in morals, to the intellectual endowments bestowed on us, by Him who reigns supreme over universal existence; and offered up my grateful orisons for the faculties which enabled me to think, to reason, and to feel as I then did—to exult in the emotions of taste, and whilst acknowledging myself "the creature of an hour," recognise an immortal alliance with the Eternal Father, "to whom a thousand years are as one day." A Way-farer.


*Also reprinted in part in:* 
https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18420122/033/0003
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 22 January 1842



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18780629/105/0006
Hereford Times - Saturday 29 June 1878

WOOLHOPE NATURALISTS FIELD CLUB

...


200 years ago in the neighbourhood, which was thought to be that of a man 11 or 12 feet high, but was more probably the bones of some fossil animal, were those of one of Vortigern's soldiers. Vortigern retreated into Wales after the battle at Amesbury, in Wiltshire, in A.D. 457(?), and it is thought took refuge at the Doward before going into Radnorshire, where he was burned in his castle. But there is no doubt that this neighbourhood was the scene of many a desperate encounter between the Saxons and the Welsh, and even so late as 1640, property was very insecure, and great losses were sustained by the incursions of predatory marauders. The Roman station, Blestium, is supposed to be that of Monmouth and
that of Ariconium about two miles from Ross. A large number of natural caves or caverns occur in places on both sides of the river, in some cases 200 to 300 feet above the present level of the water; two or three on the left bank, of which the largest and most curious is "The Diblin," although but little visited, from its isolated and rocky situation, is entered by a small opening four feet wide by two feet high. After a short scramble on hands and knees you reach a cavern in the deepest part of which you can just stand upright. Two openings lead inwards and downwards, but unite at a distance of from 30 to 40 yards. From this point you may wander for an hour or more through small passages and some considerable caverns beautifully ornamented by stalactite and stalagmite. One is called the Devil's Chapel. Another cavern has recently been opened out by a mine shaft; this has an arched roof about thirty feet high; is about one hundred feet long, by fifty wide. But the most famous is of course that which has long been known as King Arthur's cave or hall. In reference to this cave, it is reported that the rhinoceros bones were so plentiful that a neighbouring farmer carted them out to manure his land, and thus, it is said, led to the explorations and discoveries which have since been made by the Rev. W. S. Symonds, M.A., of Pendock, and other gentlemen. In clearing out the rubbish on the
upper surface, they found portions of two human skeletons, and pottery of the Romano-British period. ...

...

also in:

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18780914/182/0010
Hereford Times - Saturday 14 September 1878

WOOLHOPE NATURALISTS' FIELD CLUB.

CURSORY NOTES ON THE FOREST OF DEAN, AND SOME OF THE OBJECTS WITHIN IT.

BY EDWIN LEES, F.L.S., F.G.S., VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE MALVERN AND WORCESTERSHIRE NATURALISTS' CLUBS.

What can be shortly said about the ancient Forest of Dean may be almost comprised in what Mr. Pepys puts in his gossiping Diary under date of August, 1662, when he says that he had a "good discourse" with Sir John Winter, "a very worthy man, most of which was concerning the Forest of Dean, and the timber there, and iron works, with their great antiquity; and the vast heaps of cinders which they find, and are now of great value, being necessary for the making of iron at this day; and without which they cannot work."

The general idea of a forest is that of ground densely covered by majestic trees, but whatever may have been its aspect in pre-historic times, it has been so despoiled in various ways that in the present day Dean Forest is only a forest in name, but few extensive patches of wood occur to charm the eye, scarcely any old trees of extraordinary size remain, while wastes of bare heathy ground with scattered coal and ironworks are the more apparent features of this tract of country. Where ground has been preserved for plantations they consist only of young trees.

The woody region appears to most advantage and attractive to a lover of sylvan scenery when, crossing the river Wye from Whitchurch, either ascends Symond's Yat, and from thence looks down upon the Coldwell Rocks, and the woods that surround them, or proceeds by a lower route through the sylvan coverts that intervene between Symond's Yat and Coleford. Here on a fervid summer day he might be inclined to say with one of our poets (Gay)—

"Lead me, guard me from the sultry hours,  
Hide me, ye forests, in your closest bowers,  
Where the tall oak his spreading arms entwines,  
And with the beech a mutual shade combines."

Dean Forest had indeed the closest bowers throughout a wide extent when Drayton described it as—


.... MORE BITS HERE ... TO DO


Traces of the ancient iron works in the forest are evident in abandoned caverns and deep excavations, some of which are open to-day, and bear the curious name of Scowles `[A corruption of the British Ceawl, signifying a cavern or excavation]`. On my first visit to the Forest of Dean a friend, residing near Coleford, directed my attention to the remarkable excavations called the Scowles, at Bream, about two miles from Lydney. The place being hidden by bushes is not easily found by a stranger, and on making inquiries of persons I met on the road, the term Scowles did not seem familiar to them. At last, addressing some colliers, one of them said, "He must mean the devil's chapel," and this proved to be the fact, and so I was guided to the devil's oratory. These scowles I found to be deep narrow excavations among rugged rocks, winding about according as the old miners had followed the vein and churns of ore, deepening as they went, and leaving these catacomb-like passages, which in the lapse of time had got covered with vegetation, and crested with beeches or the dark verdure of shattered yews, making a singular and romantic appearance. The rocks on either side of these narrow gullies are nearly or quite perpendicular, and in some places a shadowy gloom oppresses the explorer. In one part of this demoniacal chapel is a lofty rock called the devil's pulpit, where ancient superstition supposed the enemy of mankind to show his horns at certain times, and direct the operations of a crowd of demons and witches there assembled. These labyrinths were certainly the toil of many years, and thus abandoned are well adapted to superstitious imaginings and wild ideas, especially when contemplated on a cloudy evening, or by moonlight, when the gloomy winding aisles are only half revealed, and a night wind moans among the flapping boughs above, the still solitude only otherwise disturbed by the shrill cry of some startled ill-omened bird. (Here was shown a sketch of the devil's chapel). The roots of trees run down these isolated rocks in a most remarkable manner, and on a gloomy day, when the dark branches of the crested trees shut out the light of heaven, a scene described by Hood in one of his poems may be realized to an imaginative observer—

It was a wild and solitary glen,  
Made gloomy by vast yews with foliage dark,  
Whose upturn'd roots like bones of buried men  
Push'd through the rotten soil for fear's remark;  
A hundred horrid stems jagged and sark,  
Struggled with twisted arms in hideous fray."

...


---
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hafren
Hafren / Sabrina Goddess of the River Severn



---

https://archive.org/details/folklore02croogoog/page/n30/mode/2up

Folk-Lore
Vol XV March 1904, no. 1

TO DO

Presidential address p12

*Tradition and its Conditions*

It is tradition, *the oral handing on of oral knowledge*, that is the means by which the most of our folklore material has been, and is being, preserved. Tradition as a process deserves examination. We ought to know what are its conditions, its limits, its possibilities ...

Now it is first to be noted that in many unlettered, that is, in my sense, bookless, communities, there are special means, pieces of social machinery, devised and practical for the preservation of the knowledge of the events and culture of the past...

The secular or bardic schools of mediaeval Ireland comprised a twelve-year course; that is to say, a pupil could not compass it in less than twelve years...


...

Personally I think the transmission-power of tradition has been very much undervalued, since we, in modern days, have so little experience of its possibilities and scope. But unfettered tradition will always be at the mercy of a slight cataclysm. It is not till tradition is committed to letters that its preservation is at all definitely assured. And this is a truth that, even in this century, is not yet sufficiently recognised. Societies such as ours must be the recorders. Our function as Recorders and Remembrancers is even more important than our function as Interpreters. Our opportunities for record are swiftly and silently slipping past. There will always be time for the Systematisers, but at present the Duty of Collection is to my mind paramount.

F. York Powell.


https://archive.org/search?query=creator%3A%22Folklore+Society+%28Great+Britain%29%22


---

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001272/18491110/042/0005
Monmouthshire Beacon - Saturday 10 November 1849

FOREST OF DEAN. Highway Robbery.—On Monday the 5th inst. James and Joseph Williams, two colliers of Cinderford, were taken before the magistrates at Newnham, charged with robbing Mr. Vaughan, a farmer of Ruardean. It appeared from the evidence that Mr. Vaughan had been to Cinderford to receive some money for work which had been done by his horses for the Cinderford Iron Works Company, and between the hours of three and four o'clock in the afternoon, as he was crossing Ruardean Hill Inclosure, two men rushed from behind a bush, one of them took Mr. Vaughan by the collar with his left hand, and in his right he held a pistol against Mr. Vaughan's head, while the other man stood a short distance off with a large stick in his hand. The man who was holding him by the collar then demanded his money, threatening at the same time that if he did not give all up to them he would blow his brains out. Mr. Vaughan then took part of his money from his pocket and gave to him. The robber said he had more and must deliver it up, or else he would blow his brains out. Mr. Vaughan then gave up all his money, which consisted of two notes of the Ross Bank, four sovereigns, one half-sovereign, and 10s. in silver; the man that held him by the collar then kicked him up, and both ran away. Information of the robbery was given to the police at Lydbrook, when P.C. Cook of that station immediately went in search of the rubbers, and after obtaining the assistance of Sergeant Banning of the Littledean station, he succeeded in taking into custody the two Williams's, and with the aid of P.C. Thompson of the Littledean station, searched their houses, but could not find any of the money which could be identified. The men were then taken before Mr. Vaughan who at once identified them as the two men who had robbed him; also identified some clothes which were found in their houses as being part of the dress they wore when they robbed him. The prisoners were both committed to Gloucester County Gaol for trial at the next assizes.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18491013/038/0007
Hereford Times - Saturday 13 October 1849

FOREST OF DEAN. Lydney.—Attempted Burglary.—On the night of the 4th inst., Highfield house, near this place, the residence of J. James Esq,, was attempted to be entered. It appears that the thieves removed the iron grating which was over the under-ground cellar windows, and broke an iron bar which was fixed in the centre of the casement, but it is supposed they were disturbed in their operations by P.C. Harrison, of the Lydney station, who passed Highfield house between one and two o'clock. The constable remained for some time, and there is no doubt but that the thieves must have heard him, as they decamped without their intended plunder. The police are using every exertion to detect the offenders.

...

Charge of Stealing Coals.— *John Guest* was broueht up in custody of P.C. Watts, of the Littledean station, charged with stealing about two tons of coal from the Cinderford iron works. The prisoner was discharged, there not being sufficient evidence to commit him.

...

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000350/18400115/011/0002
Worcestershire Chronicle - Wednesday 15 January 1840

EXTRAORDINARY CASE OF HIGHWAY ROBBERY, AND COLD-BLOODED ATTEMPT AT MURDER.

Early on Sunday morning last, this city and neighbourhood were thrown into a state of the greatest excitement by the report that a man, who had left this city the previous night, had been murdered and robbed a few miles below Tewkesbury, on the road to Cheltenham, and strong suspicion attached to a young man who lately held a very respectable situation in a stationer's shop in this city, and had always borne an unimpeachable character. From the circumstances detailed, little doubt seemed to exist that he was really the guilty party, but we are happy to state that all suspicion was removed by his appearance in this city on Monday last about twelve o'clock. On enquiry into the facts connected with this transaction we ascertained that a person named Yarworth, who is a stone getter, in the Forest of Dean, had been in this city for some few days previous to Saturday last, collecting his half-yearly accounts from the stene masons here, and receiving orders for future supplies. After finishing his business he returned to Mr. Thornes', at the Angel Inn, where he had been staying, with the intention of proceeding homewards by the way of Cheltenham, and on the arrival of the Wellington coach, which proceeds from this city to Bristol through Gloucester, at Mr. Thornes', Mr. Yarworth, with two other gentlemen, Mr. Pritchard and Mr. Sharp, got upon it. Nothing more was heard of the parties until about twelve o'clock that night, when an express arrived at our Police Station-house, from Martin, the Tewkesbury constable, stating shortly that Mr. Yarworth had been robbed and fired at twice, by a person whose description was forwarded, and who was supposed to have got upon the Mr. Thornes'. This description so far tallied with that of Mr, Pritchard, that the suspicions above mentioned seemed to leave little doubt of his guilt. Thus matters remained until about three on Sunday afternoon, when Mr, Thornes and a friend of Mr. Pritchard's proceeded to the Pitt's Elm public-house, whither Mr. Yarworth had been removed, who, upon seeing Mr. Thornes, stated that he was very glad he was come, and upon their inquiring as to Mr. Pritchard, Mr. Yarworth at once declared that he was not the person. Thus satisfied, Mr. Thornes, with Mr. Pritchard's friend, proceeded to Cheltenham in hopes to meet him there. About twelve o'clock at night the Bristol mail arrived in this city, and many persons had assembled to ascertain if anything further was known. Horsley, the coachman, stated that he had brought Mr. Pritchard by the coach to Tewkesbury, and had left him there, the mail being then full, so that he could not come on to Worcester; upon this intelligence some friends of Mr. Pritchard's proceeded in a fly to Tewkesbury, where they found him about three o'clock in the morning in bed at the Anchor Inn. He immediately got up, and his friends informed him of the report in circulation, and advised his at once proceeding to see Mr. Yarworth, to which he readily assented, and the parties having ordered a second fly, proceeded to the Pitt's `sic` Elm public-house, called the Old White Swan; where, after ascertaining that Mr. Yarworth was sufficiently well and collected to see and identify any person, Mr. Pritchard was introduced, when he immediately said to Mr. Pritchard's friends, "That is not the man, he is as innocent as you are." This having perfectly satisfied them, Mr. Yarworth then stated the cireumstances attending the attack nearly as follows:—

After leaving Mr. Thornes, some man got inside the coach, as the guard told him there was no room outside, but at what distance from Worcester I can't exactly say, though I think it was about three miles. We came on to Tewkesbury, where we all got off at the Bear Inn. After the coach had changed horses, Mr. Pritchard was left at Tewkesbury, and the man who was before inside got outside, and took the place Mr. Pritchard had occupied. While proceeding along the road, I said I should walk from Coombe Hill to Cheltenham, and the man said he was going to Cheltenham and would walk with me. When the coach arrived at Coombe Hill, we both got down. I asked him if he would take a glass of ale; he said "I should rather like a drop of gin." We went into the public house, and had a glass of ale and he had a glass of gin, which I pulled out my money to pay for, but was told that it was paid for by the other man. I said, "I don't want you to pay for me. and he said, "It is no matter between you and meé. We then set out to walk, and after proceeding about 400 yards, he pulled out a pistol, and shot me. I caught a glance of something, and turned a little round, and the bullet took my ear, and so round to the back of my neck, where it is now. I then put out my right hand to seize him, but he instantly shot me through the thick part of my side, just under my arm. I fell. He then stood over me, and reloading the pistol, asked mé for my money. I said I could not give it him, I was unable; I said I thought he had shot me enough, and implored him not to shoot me again. He then rifled my pockets, and took seven 5*l*. notes, twelve sovereigns, and nine shillings, a cheque for 5*l*., a bill at two months for 13*l*., drawn by me upon, and accepted by, Mr. Perkes, stonemason, and my watch. After he had done this, he turned to go away. I asked him not to leave me in the road, as the coaches would run over me. He turned back and said, "he was very sorry for having shot me, and that I ought to have given him my money." He then dragged me from the middle to the side of the road, put on my hat, and left me, and went towards Coombe Hill. In about five minutes, I heard a person coming along the road, and called to him; he came to me, and I told him I had been robbed and shot. The person said he could not 'move me himself, but he would soon fetch assistance. He returned in a short time with two other persons, and I was conveyed to this house (the Pitt's Elm public-house.) While Mr. Yarworth was being removed, two gentlemen, who were proceeding from Cheltenham to Tewkesbury on horseback, happened to come up, and having ascertained what was passing, one of them immediately dismounted, and, giving his horse to his friend to hold, rendered every assistance in conveying Mr. Yarworth to the Pitt's Elm public-house; and, having ascertained the danger he was in, immediately prevailed upon his friend to let him have his horse, (his own being a three-year-old,) and at once set off to Tewkesbury for a surgeon, who very promptly attended, and rendered every assistance to the wounded man. Too much praise cannot be bestowed on these gentlemen for the promptitude, alacrity, and willingness which they displayed, nor to the surgeons and others for the prompt assistance rendered by them.

Mr. Yarworth's description of the man who committed this horrible deed is as follows:— He stands about 5 feet 11 inches high, is of a sallow complexion, has dark hair, and was dressed in a dark coat, with gilt buttons, and dirty white trowsers, as he thought. Mr. Yarworth states that he could readily identify him, and the daughter of the landlord at the public-house at Coombe Hill states that she could swear to him, as she had a good opportunity of seeing him while drinking the gin; and no doubt many of the passengers on the Wellington could do the same. Mr. Pritchard's friends deeming it advisable that he should appear as quickly as possible in Worcester, set out to return, and arrived in this city about 12 o'clock, and immediately proceeded with him to the Magistrates' office, where a full Bench was assembled, and Mr. Pritchard stated the circumstances of the case, as far as he was personally acquainted with them, which were in substance as follows:— That before arriving at Tewkesbury, Mr. Yarworth said he should walk to Cheltenham from the turn at Coombe Hill, and asked Mr. Pritchard, who had told Mr. Yarworth that he was also going to Cheltenham, if he would walk with him; that he (Mr. P.) replied he would see all walking at the devil while he could ride; that when the coach arrived at Tewkesbury he got down at the Bear Inn, and knowing that the Paul Pry coach would be in Tewkesbury in an hour, he walked into the Anchor Inn, where he stayed until the Paul Pry coach came up, and proceeded by it to Cheltenham; that as the coach passed the Pitt's Elm public-house, a man standing in the road with others hallooed to the coachman, and asked if he had passed any one on the road, as a man had been shot and robbed. The coach-man drove on, and he said to him "I should think that is all nonsense—a man being shot so early in the evening as this" (it was then about seven o'clock); and the coachman said, "I dare say they only wanted me to pull up, that they might have a ride; but they seemed a queerish lot, and I was not going to do it. Mr. Pritchard then stated that on the Sunday morning he happened to go into the Wellington public-house at Cheltenham, and heard some persons talking there about the shooting and robbery of a person who came from Worcester by the Wellington coach; upon which he said, "Why I left Worcester by the Wellington coach last evening, and I know nothing of it." On this one of the persons left the house, and after he (Mr. P.) had enquired of the landlady where Mr. Holmes, a coachman, lived, he walked down the street. While so walking, a policeman came up to him and said "I beg your pardon, Sir, but I'm informed you were a passenger by the Wellington coach from Worcester yesterday evening;" Mr. Pritchard replied, "I was." The policeman then asked him if he knew anything of the robbery and shooting, and he mentioned what had passed at the Pitt's Elm public-house, with the impression the observations made by the coachman had left upon his mind. The policeman then asked him if he had any objection to go to the Station-house and tell all he knew about it. Mr. P. said certainly not. He then went with the policeman, and told him of the number of passengers, and who got up, as nearly as be could recollect. He then left the Station-house, leaving his address in Worcester, and, instead of going on to Cirencester to see a friend as he intended, walked to Gloucester for the purpose of returning to Worcester by the mail, thinking he might be wanted to give information on the subject. That he rode by the Gloucester mail to Tewkesbury, and went again to the Anchor Inn, but finding that the mail when it came up was full with booked passengers, he determined to stay till the morning, and come on by L'Hirondelle coach, which arrives in Worcester about eight o'clock. Mr. Pritchard then detailed the arrival of his friends about three o'clock, and the other facts, of which our readers are in possession.

The Magistrates expressed themselves fully satisfied with Mr. Pritchard's explanation, and regretted exceedingly that circumstances should have placed him for one moment under suspicion. Mr. Pritchard thanked the Magistrates for the kindness allowed him in giving that public explanation, and left the office to receive the warm congratulations of his friends.

Tn connexion with this subject, it transpired before the Magistrates, that a man auswering very nearly to the description given by Mr. Yarworth, and another man were taken into custody by policeman Jones, No. 11, of this city, at the Albion public-house, in the Gloucester-road, about four o'clock on Saturday last, on a charge of house-breaking at Cheltenham, intelligence of which had been forwarded to the police here, and that while Jones was securing his companion, the man above-mentioned escaped, and ran towards Mr. Allies's house. Jones immediately pursued him, and was gaining upon him, when the man turned round, presented a pistol at him, and said if he followed him any further, he would shoot him dead. Jones drew back a little, and the man ran on, Jones still following him, when the man made a dead stand, and presenting a pistol in each hand, again repeated the threat. Jones, upon this, became alarmed for his personal safety, and allowed him to get off. The Magistrates, upon Jones's explanation of this circumstance, informed him that they thought he ought to have kept his eye upon the man, though at such a distance as not to endanger his personal safety, until, as was probable, (it being market day,) some horsemen or others might have come up. But Jones stated the man seemed really so determined, that he had no doubt he would have carried his threat into execution; and, we have no-doubt, our readers will be of the same opinion. We have ascertained that the Wellington coach passed along the road in about twenty minutes after this, and, supposing Mr. Yarworth to be correct in stating that some person got inside the coach, within three miles of Worcester, and that the person who so got inside the coach was the person who shot and afterwards robbed him, little reasonable doubt can, we think, be entertained that this was the very man who escaped from Jones. The Magistrates immediately directed that Jones's description, which corresponded in the main with Mr. Yarworth's, should be forwarded to Birmingham, whither it was supposed the villain had proceeded, and that all diligence should be used by the police of our city, one of which body (Phillips) had been to Cheltenham and other places on the search; we understand at present without success.

It must strike our readers that a case of so daring and bold a nature as the present has scarcely occurred since the days of Turpin and Sheppard, and they can scarcely fail to perceive that the person, whoever he may be, must be a professional villain; as the boldness and coolness shewn on the occasion could, we should imagine, only be displayed by a practised hand. The dragging the half-murdered man out of the road, and the braggart sorrow expressed for the offence, are ample proofs of this. It is surmised that the villain, within a quarter of an hour of the commission of the crime, must have returned to this city by the Red Rover coach, a person answering his description having got upon that coach near to Coombe Hill. Whither his intended destination was, will only be ascertained when justice shall have yielded up her victim to the outraged and offended laws of his country, which we have to express our anxious hope will be ere long, and that it may be long ere this country shall be again overrun with such a set of demons as unhappily overran it in the days of our forefathers. The introduction of the Rural Police force will we trust entirely rid us from such scourges and pests of society as those of the class above referred to. Of Mr. Pritchard, it is only necessary to observe that his conduct and character stand clear and far above suspicion, and we can only add our regret to that of numbers beside, that a state of circumstances should have been presented to the publi¢ mind, which left those immediately connected with him, by the ties of friendship, to assign no other reason for acquiescing in the public opinion than insanity; but, in these cases, "when loud rumour speaks," frail man will sometimes endure the common lot of humanity, inseparable from his nature, the whisper of suspicion.

Since the above was we have learned that the coachman of the Berkeley Hunt, from Cheltenham to London, picked up an individual exactly answering the description given of the perpetrator of this horrid deed, a short distance out of Cheltenham, on the Oxford-road. That he should have got upon the Red Rover coach and returned to this city, is, we find highly improbable, as the man at the turnpike-gate, near to which the robbery was committed, states that he heard the report of the pistols about three minutes after that coach had passed through on its road to Worcester; and, no doubt, the villain chose the opportune moment when he conceived the passengers had got out of hearing, to make his daring attempt. Mr. Yarworth, we are happy to learn, is better, one of the balls having been successfully extracted, and hopes are confidently entertained of his ultimate recovery.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18400130/029/0008
Morning Post - Thursday 30 January 1840

HIGHWAY ROBBERY and ATTEMPT at MURDER

*(From the Cheltenham Free Press.)*

Never have we had to record a more atrocious attempt at murder than the one which has caused so much excitement in this town (Cheltenham) and neighbourhood during the past week. The facts are as follow:—

A person named Richard Yarworth, aged twenty-four, a quarryman, employed in the Forest of Dean, had been to Worcester for the purpose of collecting some money due to his father, who lives at Dean Pool, near Coleford. On Saturday evening he left Worcester by the Wellington coach, in company vvith two gentlemen, named Pritchard and Sharp.

The following deposition of the sufferer was taken on Sunday by D. L. St. Clair, Esq., one of the Cheltenham magistrates:—

"After leaving Mr. Thorne's (the landlord of the Angel Inn) some man got inside the coach, as the guard told him there was no room outside; but at what distance from Worcester I cannot exactly say, though I think it was about three miles. We came on to Tewkesbury, where we all got off at the Bear Inn. After the coach had changed horses Mr. Pritchard was left at Tewkesbury, and the man who before was inside got outside, and took the place Mr. Pritchard had occupied. While proceeding along the road I said I should walk from Combe-hill to Cheltenham, and the man said he was gong to Cheltenham, and would walk with me. When the coach arrived at Combe-hill we got down. I asked him if he would take a glass of ale; he said, 'I should rather like a drop of gin.' We went into the public-house, and I had a glass of ale and he had a glass of gin, which I pulled out my money to pay for, but was told that it was paid for by the other man. I said, 'I don't want you to pay for me;' and he said, 'It is no matter between you and me.' We then set out to walk, and after proceeding about 400 yards he pulled out a pistol and shot me. I caught a glance of something, and turned a little round, and the bullet took my ear, and so round to the back of my neck, where it is now. I then put out my right hand to seize him, but he instantly shot me through the thick part of my side, just under my arm. I fell. He then stood over me, and, reloading the pistol, asked me for my money. I said I could not give it him; that I was unable. I said I thought he had shot me enough, and implored him not to shoot me again. He then rifled my pockets, and took seven 5*l*. notes, twelve sovereigns, and nine shillings, a check for 5*l*., a bill at two months for 13*l*., drawn by me upon, and accepted by, Mr Perkes, stonemason, and my watch. After he had done this he turned to go away. I asked him not to leave me in the road, as the coaches would run over me. He turned back and said, 'he was very sorry for having shot me, and that I ought to have given him my money.' He then dragged me from the middle to the side of the road, put on my hat, and left me, and went towards Combe-hill. In about five minutes I heard a person coming along the road and called to him; he came to me, and I told him I had been robbed and shot. The person said he could not move me himself, but he would soon fetch me assistance. He returned in a short time with two other persons, and I was conveyed to his house (the Piff's Elm public-house)."

Two gentlemen were passing at the time of his being taken in, one of whom alighted and assisted, and the other rode to Tewkesbury for a surgeon, who attended very promptly.

Mr. Yarworth says, as far as he recollects, the man who committed the deed stands about five feet eleven in height, is of a sallow complexion, has dark hair, and had on a dark coat with gilt buttons, and dirty white trousers.

Mr. Pritchard has shown himself to Mr. Yarworth, who declared that he is not the man.

On Tuesday afternoon the first bullet was extracted by Mr. Gregory, parish surgeon of Cheltenham, whose exertions have been indefatigable.

Mr Lefroy, the head of the constabulary force, is now using his best exertions to discover the horrid assassin.

The second ball, which is supposed to be lodged in the liver, has not yet been extracted. The sufferer is a little better, and Mr. Gregory now entertains some slight hopes of his recovery.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000429/18400208/006/0002
Kendal Mercury - Saturday 08 February 1840

TO DO

HIGHWAY ROBBERY AND ATTEMPT AT MURDER. Never have we had to record more atrocious attempt at murder than the one which has caused so much excitement in the town of Cheltenham and its neighbourhood during the past week. The facts are as follows—A person named Richard Yarworth aged twenty four, a quarryman, employed in the forest of Dean, bad been to Worcester for the purpose of collecting aome money due to his father, who lives at Dean Pool, near Coleford. On Saturday evening he left Worcester the Wellington coach, in company with two gentlemen, named Pritehard and Sharp- The following deposition the sufferer was taken on Sunday by D. L. St. Clair, Esq.. one of the Cheltenham magistrates — "After leaving Mr. Thome's (the landlord of the Angel Inn) some man got inside the coach, as the guard told him there was no room outside; but at what distance from Worcester I cannot exactly say though I think it about three miles. We came to Tewkesbury, where we all got offat the Bear Inn. After the coach had changed horses Air. Pritchard was left at Tewkesbury and the man who before was inside got outside, and took the place Mr. Pritchard had occupied. While proceeding along the road I said I should walk from Combe-hill to Cheltenham, and the man said he was going to Cheltenham, and would walk with me. When the coach arrived at Combe-hill, we got down. I asked him if he would take a class of ale? He said, should rather like a drop of gin.' We went into the public-house and I had a glass ale and he had a glass gin, which pulled out my money to pay for, but was told that it was paid for by the other man. I said,' I don't want you to pay for me and he said, It is no matter between you and me.' We then set out to walk, and after proceeding about 400 yards he pulled pistol and shot me. I caught a glance of something, and turned a little round, and the bullet took my ear, and so round to the back of my neck, where it is now. I then put out my hand to seize him, but he instantly shot mi through the thick psrt of my side, just under arm. I fell. He then stood over me, reloading the pistol, asked for my money. I aaid I could not give it him, that was unable. I said I thought he had shot me enough, and implored him not to shoot again. He tin rifled my pockets, and took seven £H notes, twelve soverigns, and uine shillings, a check for X - bill at two months for £, 13, drawn by upon, and accepted by, Mr. Parkea, stonemason' and my watch. After he had done this he turned to away. I asked him not to leave me in the road, the coaches would run over He turned back and said, 'he was very sorry for having shot me, and that ought to haae given him my money.' then dragged from the middle the side of the road, put on my hat, and left me, and went towards Combe-hill. about Ave minutes heard person com tag along the road, and called to him t he came me, and I told him I had been robbed and root. The person said he coald not move himself, but would toon fetch some assistance. He returned in time with two other persons, I was conveyed his house (the PiflTg public-house)." Two gentlemen were passing at the time of hia?? being taken in one whom alighted and assisted, and the other rode Tewkesbury for a eurgeon, who attrndei very promptly. Mr \ eayt, far he recollects, the man who committed the daed standa about five feet height, is of complexion, has dark hair, and bad dark coat wilh gilt buttons, and dirty white trousers. On Tuesday afternoon the first bullet was extracted Mr Gregory, surgeon of Cheltenham, whore exertions hare been indefatigable. The second ball, which is supposed be lodged in the liver, has not yet been extracted. The is a little better, and Mr. Gregory now entertains some slight hopes of his recovery. We are glad hear that the robber has fallen into the hands of justice. He was arrested on Wednesday at Bristol. and now is safe custody. The clothes ia supposed to hare worn the night of the robbery hare been found the pawnbroker's where he had pledged them, and provided himself with fresh habiliments. The young woman at the public-huuae Combe-hill, who supplied him with the glasa gin he drank before starting to walk Cheltenham with Mr. Yarworth, has positively identified him; but the wounded man, who we regret to say, remains, in very dangerous state, was not in a condition to see the robber on Wednesday.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000034/18400307/008/0004
Bristol Mercury - Saturday 07 March 1840

TO DO

Committal of Bowen for attempted Murder of Mr. Warworth.

Tuesday being appointed for the further examination of witnesses at Coombe-hill, in the immediate vicinity of the spot where poor Yarworth was so cruelly shot and robbed, numbers of persons began to congregate from Tewkesbury and other places to hear the decision of the mnagistrates; the liveliest interest was excited, and every room of the Swan Inn, where the magistrates were to meet, was crowded.

The prisoner Bowen, attended by two policemen, arrived by the Wellington coach about twelve o'clock. Archdeacon Timbrell was in attendance about half-past twelve, and the inquiry commenced before the Archdeacon, Mr. Newman, of this city, Mr. Martin, and Captain Surman, about an hour afterwards; Mr. Harmar acting as solicitor for the prosecution. Mr. Lefroy, and a party of the Gloucestershire constabulary force, wvere also there; the first witness examined was-

Police-sergeant Griffiths, who gave similar testimony to that given by him at Lawford's Gate, as also did Inspector Bosworth. In reply to a question by Mr. Harmar, the sergt. said he expected no reward in the event of Bowen's conviction, as he had given up his claim to it.

Miss Grainshaw repeated the evidence formerly given by her, and, after describing the prisoner, and what happened in her presence on the night of the robbery, said she had not the least doubt as to his identity; he lad the same sort of coat on as he has now, it was buttoned up, but she did not observe the cuff or other parts being torn.

Griffiths: The coat is not in exactly the same state as it was.

Bowen: *It is the same now as it was then.*

This observation, made sharply in answer to Griffiths, created a great sensation it the court: prisoner, seeing the error he had fallen into, seemed (for the only time during the examination) confounded for a moment; he, however, quickly recovered himself, and explained it away by saying be meant the coat was the same now as it had been for two or three months back.

Mr. Harmar then asked Miss Gramshaw whether Bowen did not, the first time he was before the Cheltenham magistrates, say that he was at the Swan on the Monday after the robbery, and that she (witness) was making toast, and had a blue pinafore on?

Dr. Timbrell thought that was a question that should not be asked, inasmuch as it related to examinations taken before another bench of magistrates, with which they had nothing to do.

Mr. Harmar said that, as whatever a prisoner states may be brought in evidence against him, it *was* important. He had stated this in presence of witnesses, and he was anxious that the question should be put and answered. The depositions taken before the Cheltenham magistrates, as well as those taken now, would be forwarded to the judge of assize; and without an answer to a question something like the present, some parts of the depositions would appear inexplicable.

Miss Gramshaw, in continuation, said: She did not see Yarworth and the prisoner go out of the house together, but heard of the robbery the same night by Mr. Buswell, of the Tewkesbury police, and described the person and dress of the prisoner to him.

Mary Ann Davis, cousin to the last witness, corroborated her statement.

It was here intimated that a man named Bailey, who was shot in two places in the neighbourhood of Gloucester on the 9th of November last, by two men, one of whom is committed and waiting his trial, was anxious to see the prisoner, to ascertain whether, according to his recollection, he was anythinig like the other offender, who is still at large. He waas ordered to be introduced, but after attentively looking at the prisoner, he declared he was not like the man still at large who attacked him. The attempt on Bailey was made on the same night Mr. Merrill was robbed, and most likely by the same parties.

Mr. Gregory, surgeon, of Cheltenham, spoke as to the injuries poor Yarworth had sustained, and to his abstracting one ball from him; there was another now lodged at the back of his lungs, the right lobe of which has gangrened and been coughed up by him, leaving no doubt as to his being in a consumption which must at no very distant period cause his death. He would not give an opinion as to whether Yarworth would be able to attend at Gloucester assizes, but thought he might be removed from Piff's Elm just now with temporary benefit to his health; it would not be prudent to admit any more persons to the examination or Mr. Y. than the magistrates and their clerk; the poor man was much excited in consequence of expecting a visit from the parties, and there was that hectic flush on his cheek this morning which was anything but satisfactory to witness.

This announcement seemed to make a deep impression on those who heard it, amongst whom were two of Mr. Yarworth's brothers. All hope of his ultimate recovery seems thus to be cut off, and the reflection that a man in the prime of life, enjoying the most robust health, should be doomed, by the murderous attack of an assassin, to a lingering yet certain death, and be lost for ever to his family and friends, is painful in the extreme.

The magistrates then proceeded to Pff's Elm, a distance of three quarters of a mile from Coombe-hill. The prisoner was marched between two policemen to the same place. The road is the same that Yarworth and his murderer (whoever he may be) went on the night he was shot. Although the populace followed in great numbers, there was no attempt at disturbance, or insult offered to Bowen. The only thing of the kind which we heard was the charitable wish of some individual admirer of Lynch law, who, passing the tree under which Yarworth was found, heartily wished the tree might be converted then and there into a substitute for the new drop-sigiilflcantly hinting that Bowen's body would prove highly ornamental to it.

Yarworth, upon being confronted with the prisoner, made a lengthened deposition; the main facts of which having, however, been so repeatedly before the public, we only think it necessary to give the portions referring to the identity of the prisoner:—"When we arrived at Tewkesbury a man got outside of the coach; I took very little notice where he sat; he sat on the behind seat; I could not see his face, but the prisoner present resembles the man who shot me; I recollect seeing that he had buttons on his coat like those worn by the prisoner, and were about the same size. Before we got off the coach I heard the person say, in answer to an observation made by me, 'I ought to have that place, I am so thinly clothed;' have now heard him repeat the same words, and I think the voice is the same; I said I was going to Cheltenham; the man said he would walk with me for company; we walked together towards Cheltenham; I remarked to the man, 'it is likely to be a sharp frost;' he mumbled something in answer. A coach passed us which was going towards Coombe-hill. A short time afterwards the man called to me to stand; the same man who told me to stand and shot me was the man who rode on the coach with me, and who came from the inn at Coombe-hill with me; I have now heard the prisoner say 'stand,' and it is the same sound of voice. When I was on the ground he told me to deliver up my money, and appeared to be loading another pistol, and said he would blow my brains out if I did not; I have now heard the prisoner repeat those words, and he pronounces the word 'money' in the same wvay as when he told me to deliver up my money; I think I asked him to put me against a tump of earth in the road, and he did so, and put my hat on my head. He said, 'I'm sorry I shot vou, it was your own fault;' he then ran away towards Coombe-hill; it was only a short time from the time he shot me till the time he ran away-not two minutes; I was shortly afterwards brought to this place; have now heard the prisoner repeat the words 'I am sorry I shot you, it is your own fault;' and the words 'Shot ye' are just like it; I believe that is the man by his appearance, and I can think of nothing else; I do not judge from the evidence, but from my own head, and from looking at him now; recollect that before I got off the coach at Coombe-hill, Mr. Sharp changed me half-a-sovereign."

The mtgistrates, on their return, assembled again at the Swan; Sharp's deposition, taken at a previous meeting, was read over; it was strongly corroborative of Mr. Yarworth's.

Dr. Timbrell, addressing the prisoner, said,-We have heard the evidence against you in the attempted murder and robbery of Richard Yarworth; have you anything to say in your defence?

The prisoner had nothingto say in his defence; he wished he had the same witnesses to produce as he had at Cheltenham, but he declined signing a declaration to that effect.

Dr. Timbrell-You have heard all the evidence against you, and, having nothing to say in your defence, we think the proofs of your guilt so great that we feel it our bounden duty, as magistrates, to commit you for trial at the ensuing assizes. If you are not guilty, the jury will pronounce your acquittal; and if you are guilty, it is our hope that you will meet with that punishment your crime so richly deserves.

The prisoner hoped so himself; he hoped whoever was guilty might suffer.

Yarworth's brother William, was bound over to prosecute, and the witnesses entered into their recognizances to attend and give evidence.

Bowen, who seemed perfectly unconcerned, was then removed in custody to Gloucester, were he will remain till the assizes, which take place on the 1st of next month.

The inquiry lasted until five o'clock in the afternoon.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18400811/007/0002
Morning Post - Tuesday 11 August 1840

DEATH OF RICHARD YARWORTH

Ilt is with much regret that we announce the death of Mr. Yarworth, which event took place yesterday at his father's house at Dean Pool, near Coleford, from the effects of the wound he received so long ago as the 11th of January last, from a robber on the highway at Piff's `sic` Elm, on the road from Tewkesbury to Cheltenham. Though the atrocity which has led to this melancholy termination must be fresh in the memory of many of our readers, there may be some to whom a recapitulation of the circumstances attending it may be acceptable. The unfortunate subject of these remarks was about thirty-four, and has always borne an unblemished character. He was a fine strong young man, of considerable personal courage, but modified by great kindness of disposition. Early in January he left home and went to Worcester to collect some debts due to his father, and he was on his return to Worcester as a passenger on the Wellington coach, on the evening of tho 11th of January, when a little way out of that city a stranger got upon the coach and rode through Tewkesbury to Combe-hill. At Combe-hill poor Yarworth got off the coach for the purpose of walking from thence to Cheltenham, where he had some business to transact; and, having stated this upon the coach, the stranger said he was going to Cheltenham also, and proposed to walk there in company. This was agreed to, and after taking some refreshment at the Combe-hill Inn they set out together, but had not gone far when the stranger suddenly cried "Stand," and at the same instant discharged a pistol, the ball from which carried away part of Yarwoth's ear and entered his neck. The wounded man immediately raised his arm to defend himself, when the assassin fired a second pistol, the ball from which entered Yarworth's side below his arm, and lodged in his back. This completely disabled the unhappy man, and his brutal assailant thereupon proceeded to rifle his pockets, from which he stole seven 5*l*. notes, eleven sovereigns, some silver, and two bills of exchange; and after having, at the wounded man's request, dragged him to the side of the road, the assassin left him. He was found soon afterwards, and removed to the Piff's Elm Inn, where he received surgical attendance. The ball from his neck was extracted, but the one lodged in his back defied the most skilful efforts for its removal; it had lodged in the immediate vicinity of the lungs, and after creating seven months' suffering it yesterday (Friday) terminated the existence of a valuable member of society, and a most respectable though humble man. To the honour of the benevolent feeling of the public it is right to state that a subscription was entered into, and the pecuniary loss of the unfortunate man more than made up, and a liberal reward was offered for the discovery of the assassin. A man named Bowen is now in custody,"on suspicion of being the assassin of Mr. Yarworth, and will take his trial at our ensuing assizes. This circumstance induces us to forbear further remarks on this most painful and melancholy event. —*Glouceser Journal* of Saturday.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000150/18410415/043/0004
Worcester Journal - Thursday 15 April 1841

MURDER OF MR. YARWORTH

The trial of *William Bowen*, aged 24, who was charged with the wilful murder Mr. Richard Yarworth on the 11th of January, 1840, came on at Gloucester on Wednesday last before Mr. Justice Coleridge.

Mr. Alexander, with whom was Mr. Skinner, conducted the prosecution; Mr. Muclean and Mr. Greaves defended the prisoner.—Attorney for the prosecution, Mr. Harmer, Bristol; attorney for the prisoner, Mr. Okey, Bristol.

Mr. Alexander stated the case, the particulars of which will found in the subjoined evidence. The Learned Counsel then called Robert Sharp, who deposed as follows:—I am a railway contractor, and was Worcester on January 11, 1840. I was staying at the Angel Inn there; I saw Mr. Yarworth there. We both left by the Wellington coach together. The coach stopped at Coomb Hill, where we got down. I was sitting with face to the horses, and Mr. Yarworth occupied the seat where the guard generally sat, with his face to the horses; when we arrived at this side of Kempsey, a person came up, stopped the coach, and the guard put him inside. It was quite light at the time. I looked at the person, and he was dressed in a sort of brown coat with brass buttons; we then proceeded to the Bear Inn, Tewkesbury. I and some of the passengers got off. Mr. Yarworth also got off and walked onwards, and the person who was taken up near Kempsey got out and mounted the coach outside. The coach proceeded to an inn in the middle of Tewkesbury, and there changed horses; there was a gas lamp there; we stopped ten minutes there; the person who came from the inside sat opposite to me; I could perfectly see his feature. I believe the prisoner is the man. I kept my seat until within two miles of Coomb Hill, when I changed my seat and sat close by the prisoner, who remarked, "It is a cold night." I have heard the prisoner's voice once since, when before the Magistrates at Cheltenham; and as far I can recollect, it is the same. I saw Mr. Yarworth again as we passed the church at Tewkesbury. Previously to his getting off the couch, Mr. Yarworth asked me to change him half-a-sovereign, which I did. It was then quite light, being a beautiful moonlight night. The prisoner told Mr. Yarworth that he had dropped something down off the coach. Mr. Yarworth then said, "Are you going to Cheltenham? If you are we will go together." They both got off the coach, Mr. Yarworth saying he would have glass of ale.—Cross-examined by Mr. Maclean: I afterwards changed my seat, having my back to the horses. I then got to the former position, with my face to the horses; this I did two or three times. Being a stranger to the road, I cannot tell the places where I changed my seat.

Mary-Ann Grimshaw sworn—My father keeps the Swan Inn, at Coomb Hill, about four miles and a half from Cheltenham. I remember the evening of the 11th of January, 1840. The Wellington coach from Worcester came up, and I saw Mr. Yarworth. I did not know him before. A person was following him; that person was the prisoner; and he twice asked me for a glass of gin, and Mr. Yarworth ordered two glasses of ale. The Wellington coach had gone when the gin was asked for. I told the prisoner to go to the bar for the gin; he went there and I followed him. Mr. Yarworth was standing outside the bar door, and the prisoner also; prisoner said he would not have ale but gin; my cousin served him. I afterwards went to the back kitchen; prisoner was still standing at the bar-door, and I passed close to him, having a lighted candle in hand; he was then drinking the gin. I observed his coat and it had gilt buttons on; it was buttoned up; he had a handkerchief round his mouth. I did not observe any thing the matter with the coat sleeve. I was before the Magistrates at Coomb Hill. When there I said that I did not observe that the coat sleeve was torn. The prisoner said "it is the same now as it was that evening." The next coach after the Wellington to Tewkesbury was the Red Rover, which came from Cheltenham. It was a pair-horse coach, not four-horse. The Rover came in ten minutes after the Wellington; the Rover stopped at our house a quarter of an hour, for the coachman and two passengers to take tea. When I was before the Magistrates the prisoner said he was at our house on the Monday morning after the robbery, and that I was making toast, and had on a blue pinafore. I was not doing so at that time, nor had I a blue pinafore. I next saw prisoner at Piff's Elm in room, and there were others in the room also; prisoner was in the room before I was; I knew him quite well; I said that was the person who was at our house on Saturday evening.—Cross-examined by Mr. Greaves: A one-horse fly passed our house at nine in the morning, and a two-horse coach passed at half-past ten the same morning. Am certain no one got off that coach to come into our house. I know a man named Hawkins; he lives a little distance from our house, and is frequently at our house. I did not see him at the house on the Monday morning. I made no toast that morning. A man named Pritchard was brought to our house on suspicion of the murder of Mr. Yarworth. Many persons came to the house in consequence of the report of the murder. I will swear a little girl has never seen me wearing a blue pinafore. Hawkins was at our house on the night of the murder. Did not say to Hawkina that "I wish I had known sooner what was to take place, and I would have taken more notice of him," nor any words to that effect. I quite forget whether I gave a description of Hawkins to Castle the constable. I gave a description to Mr. Boswell. I never told any one that the man had a double-breasted coat on with two rows of gilt buttons, nor that the back of the man's hand was hurt; nor did Davis tell Castle so in my presence.I did not say that the man was five feet ten inches high. I know Miss Brown, but did not see her until the prisoner was at Piff's Elm. I have not talked to her about appearing against Bowen, nor did I ever send for her. I never said to her "he must be the man and you must swear to it." I did not talk to her about a pleaaant journey to Bristol. I never said to her "why don't you swear to the man, he is sure to be the man, and what matter; for I should enjoy your company to Bristol with us;" nor did I say anything the kind. I did not see Miss Brown on the evening of the murder. I did not ask any one at Piff's Elm "which is the man?" I said that was the man the moment I went into the room. There was a handkerchief round his throat; but I cannot tell why it was put on him; it was not because I could not tell whether he was the man not. I then said that he had a handkerchief when he came to our house. My cousin (Preston) went into the room with me. The handkerchief was a plaid coloured one.

TO DO

Mary Ann Preston sworn—I remember the Wellington coach stopping at our house, the Swan Inn, Coomb Hill, on the 11th of January, 1840. I was in the bar at the lime. Mr. Vat worth and another person came in. That jierson was the prisoner. ordered glass gin. Mr. Yarworth ordered a glass ale for the prisoner, but he said would not have It. had a dark coloured coat on, which was buttoned up. They afterwards left the bar. On the Monday following I was at the house Coomb Hill, but did not see the prisoner. I toasted no bread that morning, nor had on a blue pinafore. None of the servants wear blue pinafores, nor did they at that that time. I was before the Magistrates at Cheltenham, and heard the prisoner say that he was at Coomb Hill on the Monday morning, and had some beer.—Cross-examined: When I was at Piff's Elm, Castle, a constable, asked me how the prisoner was dressed. I said he had a dark coat on, but did not observe what colour it was;—I said the coat had one row of gilt buttons.—I did not tell Castle that there were two rows of gilt buttons; but I told him that prisoner had handkerchief tied round hia neck.—I don't recollect saying anything mote about his description than that was rather tall. I did not say he had cut on his hand. don't recollect seeing prisoner's hand being bound up when drinking the gin. Aaron Boswell sworn—I passed between Coomb Hill and Piff's Elm on the 11th of January, 1840, and found Mr Yarworth lying on the r««d. It was near the PtiTs Elm House, halfway between and the turnpike gale. I and a friend were riding together on horseback—I did not assist Mr. Yarworth but my friend did—I saw some persons on the road carrying Yarworth PifTa Elm—he appeared in dying state— Cross-examined: It about six o'clock when—I found Mr. Yarworth on the road, but I did not look at my watch. The Rev. Dr. Timbrill was sworn, and slated that he is a Magiatrate of the county of Olouceater. The depoaltion of Mr. Yarworth was taken before me. The prisoner was present. Mr. Yarworth was sworn, and his evidence taken in writing. The deposition was then read, and was as follows name is Richard Yarworth. I reside at Clearwel), near Coleford, this county. I am a quarryman. I had occasion to go Worcester a few days before the 11th of January last.—I went to Worcester on the Bth.—I received some money at Worcester. I went there collect debts for my I left Worcester on Saturday, the 11th January, by the ellington coach at four o'clock. A man the name of Sharp had been the same inn in Worcester with me. left Worcester on the same roach with me; we both rode on the outside of the coach, on the back part of it. When we arrived at Tewke>bury man got outside of the coach; took very little notice where sat. sat the hind seat. I could not see his face, but the prisoner present resembles the man who shot me. I recollect seeing that he had buttons on his coat like those worn by the prisoner, and about hia siae. I got olf the coach Coomb Hill, and begot off also. Before got off the coach—I heard the person say, in answer an observation made by me, ought to have that place,—I thinly clothed.' I have now heard him repeat the same words, and I think it the same voice. I and the person who got off the coach both went into Comb Hill together, and—I ordered two glasses of ale, one for him and one for me. The man said he would have a glass of gin;—I did not see him drink it. I did not pay for what—I had, nor what the other man had. left the house-together and walked down the road towards Cheltenham.—I said I was going to Cheltenham; the man said he would walk with for company. walked together towards Cheltenham.—I remarked to the man ia likely to a sharp frost;* he mumbled something in anawer. A coach passed us which was going towards Coomb abort time aftetwards the man called me stand. The same man who told stand, and who shot me, was the same man who rode on the coach with me, and who came away from the inn at Coomb Hill with me. I have now heard the prisoner say stand,' and it is the same sound of voice. After the person said 'stand,' I turned round, thinking he wanted to look at something, and he fired pistol at and shot me the neck; ami on lifting up arm he fired a second pistol, and the ball entered under my arm, and I soon after fell down. When—I was on the ground told to deliver up mv money, and appeared be loading another pistol, and said be would blow brains out if did not. have now heard the prisoner repeat these words, and ht pronounces the word money* in the same way when told me to deliver up my money.—I said I had not power to give it him. He men searched pockets and toox from a pocket book and seven five-pound notes and eleven or twelve sovereigns, and a silver watch. took two promissory notes out my waistcoat pocket, one for 111/. ss. drawn by Humphrey Crisp, in favour my father, William Yarworth; and the other drawn William Perks, in father's favour also; I think was for 19/. I then him to put against a tump of earth in the road, and did so, and put my hat on head. He said 'I am sorry I shot you, it was your own fault.' then ran away back towards the pike and Coomb Hill. It was only a very abort time from the time shot till the time he ran away, not two minutes. I was shortly afterwards brought to this place. I have now heard the prisoner repeat the words, sorry I shot you, it was your own fault,' and the words shot you* is just like it. I believe that he is the man by his appearance, and I think nothing else. I do not judge from the evidence, but from my own head and from looking him now. I recollect that before—I got off the coach at Coomb Hill, Mr. Sharp changed me half sovereign. (Signed) Richard Yakvobth. Taken and fate us, the 3rd day of March, 1840. J. Timbkell, J. W. Mabtiv, H. W. Newham." Richard Griffith, sergeant in the Bristol police, was sworn. hare been nine years in the Bristol police force. I have known the prisoner seven years. I remember Sunday, the 26th January, » searched the prisoner on tlurt day, at a house in Great Gardens, Bristol, where I found him; he tried to make his escape at the back door, but—I secured him.—I asked him how long he had been Bristol, and he said "about a fortnight." we were on the way to the station-house, I asked him where he had been lodging at; he said at Shoft'a, Lewin's Mead. He said he had last come out of Wales. Inspector Boswell directed me to go to his lodgings and search for his clothes, so that he might be described in the advertisement in the Hue and Cry—I went to the house occupied by Mrs. Fisher, where I obtained coat and waistcoat; I took them to the station-house, and pul them on the prisoner; he said the coat was not his, but the waistcoat was. When the inspector read the advertisement in the Hue and Cry, the prisoner on hearing it said, The coat not mine, but—I do not care, aa I have not been in the neighbourhood for three years," said he had been travelling about Wales selling razors and braces a long time. I saw the prisoner next morning in his cell, and told him was going to Short's, to ascertsin bow long he had been in Bristol. He then said, may as well tell you the truth—I came into Bristol this day fortnight." He then asked me whether I was going to take him before our magistrates elsewhere; I told him before our magistrates, and moat probable to Cheltenham and Coomb Hill; when he said, "If I am taken to Coomb Hill, I shall known there." then said that be had worn the cost on Monday morning. That was the coat I found at Fisher's;—I said what rooming was it? He replied, "This day fortnight." said he left Birmingham and came to Worcester, and stayed there nine days; that be left Worcester, on the 11th, went to Tewkesbury, then to Coomb Hill, and anired in Bristol on the 13th. I took the prisoner to PitTs Elm on the 28th of January; I saw Mr. Vsrworth there; this was between five and six o'clock in the evening; we had a candle; Mr. Varwnrth raised himself and said to the prisoner, "You are the man," or "You be the man;'* "I swear you." I then took the prisoner away—Crosa-examined by Mr. Greaves:—I will not swear that Mr. Yarwovth said, "You are the mao," or, "You be the man." I did not say word to Mr. Yarworth. I did not ask prisoner word about the case on the road. Inspector Boswell, of the Bristol police, staled that he knew the prisoner. On the 26th of January, 1840, the prisoner was brought to the station-house. The coat and waistcoat were pul upon him, and the prisoner said the cost was not bis, but the waistcoat was, and that he had never worn the coat. Ruth Grimes stated that she lived at Great Gardens, Bristol, in January, and had known the prisoner well for twelve years; knew Mrs. Fisher; on the 14th of January her son was drowned, and she was much distressed. Prisoner told her not to trouble herself about it, he had plenty money, and he would bury her son decently gnd pay the expenses of the funeral himself. He said he had between 20/. and 30/. upon him, and that when he was coming from Worcester to Gloucester had between 30/. and 40/. upon him. Prisoner gave witness shilling to buy some rum with, which he produced from a - handful of silver. He had a dark green coat on, turned down > at the collar. This was between one and two, at dinner time. William Gregory, surgeon, stated that he was called on to attend the deceased on the 11th of January, 1840, Pit's Elm. He was cold and depressed. There was bullet under the right ear, and another had pierced his side under the right arm, but I could not trace the bullet; It was lodged in the ipine attended him from January to April, when removed. He ft* worse and worse, and had symptoms of consumption, the bullet had passed through one of the lungs and caused spitting of blood. The wound in the lungs from the bullet caused consumption to ensue; be had not symptoms consumption at first.—I never thought would recover after the symptoms of consumption had showed themselves. « hen the prisoner was brought into the room, Mr. Yarworth saw That is the man," or, That's him." I said him hope vou will be cautious," and then he said—I think It him." don't recollect the day on which this occurred, but was three or four days after Mr. Yarworth was brought Piff's Elm. Thomas Marsh, surgeon, of Coleford, stated that be had been acquainted with Mr. Yarworth many years. Saw him immediately after his removal in April last year,and found him the Ui stage of a consumption. He had the mark of wound on hia neck, and another under his fight arm. Had occasion to to Ijondon before hie death, and deceased begged him to return quickly if he wished to aee him alive. Deceased was fully impressed with sense his danger. When told it would require an operation to extract the second ball, deceased said—" If I am to be cut, it should be done soon." Made post mortem examination, and extracted the bullet from the spine* Policeman Griffith, recalled by the Judge-I found no pistols in Fisher's house I did not search Short's houst . This closed the case for the prosecution. The Defence.— Mr. Maclean then addressed the Jury on behalf of the prisoner, commenting on the difficulty of establishing the identity of prisoner by persons who had such inadequate opportunity for accurate observation those who had examined in this case, and remarking on the much lets exceptionable testimony which he should be able to produce of the prisoner having been at Worcester the time the atrocity committed The I/eamed Counsel called the following witnesses James Orfrin, the roan with the dog, who rode on the Wellington coach with anti the passenger who got off at Coorob Hill He had talked good deal with that person while the coach, and was very positive that the prisoner was not the tpan, though admitted, on cross-examination that he might have expressed contrary opinion in conversation to owner Green.—Thomas Parr and Mary Parr, landlord and landlady of the Britannia public-house, at Worcester, swore that from six o'clock, the evening the rubbery, till the next day, the prisoner was at their house; they knew him well, because he bad lodged their house previously. In crosaexamiuatioo, the landlord said robbery took place in one of Worcester streets the day after, and witocss's suspicions were excited that the prisoner was bad character.—Joseph Winwood sod John Hemming, customers the Britannia, swore dis, tinctly that they were in the company the prisoner, that house, on the evening of the robbery.—George Jones, formerly police constable of Worcester, swore, that while attempting to person near Worcester at near four o'clock, on the afternoon of the 11th January, 1840, the man drew a pair of pistols, and threatened to blow witness's brains out, and witness I in consequence desisted from following him, and returned towards Worcester; this was just before the Wellington coach passed that way towards Gloucester; that person was not the I prisoner William Cook, Cheltenham constable, also described the person alluded by the last witness; afterwards saw him in Horscmongtr Lane Gaol; his name was John Summerfield. Mr. Hardwick, tailor, Cheltenham, stated that on Saturday evening in January, a man answering the description given by the previous wltomes, called at his shop and bought macintosh, for which he changed five-pound note; and Thomas Barrett, publican, North leach, stated that such a man, dressed In a macintosh, called at his bouse, and while taking some refreshments pulled out a hunting watch.— (The inference sought to be established the evidence of these witnesses was, that the man who escaped from the constable, near Worcester, was the person who got upon the Wellington coach; that he, and not the prisoner, was the person who committed the robbery; snd that the five-pound note which was changed Cheltenham, and the hunting watch which he exhibited at Northleach, were part of the stolen property.]— Ann Brown wav then called for the purpose of casting suspicion on the accuracy the statement made by the female witnesses from Coomb Hill public house; but before she was sworn, Mr. Justice Coleridge stopped the case by observing, that some part of the a/ibi set up on the part of the prisoner was explainable. seemed however him that there was enough proved for the Jury readily to assent to verdict of not guilty. If that were their opinion, the inquiry had gone far enough for the purposes of justice. On the part of the prosecution, good many witnesses had spoken of the identity of the prisoner and hia being at a particular place on the night of the 11th of January. Every one might intend to apeak the truth and yet make mistake. Take, for example, the young ladies, Miss Grimshaw and Miss Davis, (now Mrs. Preston.) They all knew how persons might make mistake and be intentionally true, and yet, in of fact, incorrect. This the case with the evidence for the prosecution, with the exception the contradictory statements of the prisoner at Bristol. might be true that the prisoner was man of bad character, and yet be entirely innocent of this charge. On the part of the prisoner, the witnesses give good reasons for remembering the particular night on which they fixed for the prisoner's being at Worcester, at nearly six o'clock; in short, for the whole night. If that were true, the prisoner was an innocent man, for could not be at Worcester and in another place at the same time. As to the witnesses Farr and his wife, sod the others who came forward to prove that the prisoner was at Farr's house that night, the Jury must be prepared to say they were perjury If they did not believe their evidence. If those witnesses were incorrect in point fact, they most be perjured. If the Jury thought so they could not find the prisoner guilty- In all criminal cases the Jury ought not to return verdict of guilty, if they had any reasonable doubt of the truth of the evidence against prisoner. saying this he did not mean to say that the case was not such a one as ought to have been scot to Jury, nor did he wish be inferred. The Jury immediately returned verdict of Not Guilty— There was sooilter indictment charging the prisoner with robbing Mr. Yarworth on the night of the 11th January, 1840. Under the direction of his Lordship the Jury returned verdict of Not Guilty. The trial commenced at eight in the morning and was thus suddenly terminated at sis In the evening. The greatest interest excited the trial throughout the day; numbers endeavoured to get into Court merely to obtain a peep at the prisoner, and when was liberated a large crowd assembled and followed * and -rards down the him through Berkeley Street, •ftervat. - et'ettgmte Street. The prisoner manifested much composure through the trial, and several times spoke his attorney. He did not appear to have all suffered from his long imprisonment, and looked better than when brought up nt the last Assizes.
