# Tipperary Witch


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000425/18640909/036/0003
Cork Examiner - Friday 09 September 1864

A WITCH—MARVELLOUS REVELATION! Carrick-on-Suir, Saturday.— If Mrs. Mary Doheny lived in the "merrie olden times," she would just now be in imminent danger of having her body constituted materials for an *auto-da-fe*. Her achievements in the "black art" have been the theme of horror and wonderment amongst the good folk of Carrick-on-Suir, and a magisterial investigation has but tended to add fuel to the flame of consternation which the announcement of her powers had given existence to. For years past she has lived in affluent circumstances by selling love potions to romantic and foolish girls, while she occasionally netted respectable sums amongst farmers' wives with whom things were not going altogether smoothly. But she surpassed herself when she succeeded in enrolling two steady members of the constabulary force on the list of her votaries, and enmeshing, one of them at least, in debt to a considerable amount in supplying her extraordinary demands upon him. Sub-Constable Joseph Reeves has outlived the first buddings of youthful enthusiasm; he is a married man, of some five and forty years of age, and the father of a family. Some time ago his eldest daughter became ill, and hearing of the curative powers of Mrs. Doheny, his wife engaged ber services and the child improved somewhat. Henceforward, Mrs. Doheny became a frequent guest at the tea-table of the constable, and time she predicted that ere long he would be in affluent circumstances, inasmuch as some of his relatives and connections who had been dead for years had come to life, and would soon be permitted to show themselves upon the earth. He was also led to believe that Sir James Power, who died some ten years ago, took a deep interest in his well-being, and purposed giving him some landed property, and the result was that a correspondence was carried on between them, and the constable received no less than twenty-five letters and a gold ring from the occupant of the grave, the missives in question being regularly forwarded by Mrs. Doheny, and the replies occasionally came through her, and were sometimes found in an old moat on the hiil-side. To attest her powers still further, she made an assignation with the constable to meet him in a certain field at a particular hour, and there she revealed to him the person of his father-in-law, William Mullins, standing at a few yards' distance, dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons, a knee breeches, coarse stockings and shoes; he was not allowed to address the vision, which was beheld by his son, a boy about nine years of age, at the same time. She also showed him others of his friends, &c., who had been dead; amongst others, his son William, who departed this life some five or six years ago. This the constable deposed to on oath before the magistrates on Saturday, and as regarded her power in this respect, he was corroborated on oath by his wife. Mr. Hanna, who, with Messrs. Jephson and Wilson, presided, asked him if he had been drinking at the time, and the man replied that he had not tasted spirituous liquors for the past twenty-two years. This appears strange, to be sure, but then there is further testimony. Sub-constable Hayes is brought forward, and he deposes on oath that the woman has brought up before him several of his friends and connections who had been dead for years, and in this statement he is also corroborated by his wife. For weeks after, Mrs. Doheny is supplied with meal, for the sustenance of the potatoes, tea, &c. &c., for the sustenance of the dead who have come to life, and on more than one occasion, some tobacco was sent to old Mullens, who, it appears, was in his lifetime a great smoker. To meet these demands Constable Reeves got into debt, but the promise of gold and landed property induced him to resort to extensive credits to furnish supplies. New potatoes were at one time returned to him, with a request from the dead that they should be exchanged for old, and on one occasion some eggs were sent back with word that they had not agreed with the dead son William. Mr. Heard, the energetic and most intelligent sub-inspector, at length got intelligence of what was going on, and he determined to make inquiries in reference thereto; Reeves was removed to Clonmel in conseqnence of the debts he had contracted, and learning the cause thereof, he proceeded to Mrs. Doheny's house, where he found the letters (twenty five), from Sir James Power, which she had when the thing got noised abroad. He also got three bottles containing tea, cream, and milk, made up in a clean white handkerchief, and which Mrs. Doheny acknowledged were to have been forwarded to some of her defunct clients on the same evening. The house was otherwise comfortably furnished, and the dame appeared to live well on the credulity of the people. She was, of course, arrested, and the present proceedings were instituted. It was a strange thing to witness in a public court of justice—a number of intelligent people apparently in their senses deposing to such things on oath in the presene of magistrates. Whatever spell she may have wrought, there is no question of doubt but that the policemen named and their families still place implicit faith in her, for when being removed to the dock, Reeves shook her by the hand, and asserted such, and in reply to one of the magistrates, said, "Sir, if you had seen as much as I have you would be of the same opinion." After taking down in writing Reeves' evidence, and he having signed same, the magistrates were about to adjourn when Mr. Wilson, addressing Doheny, said, "Have you anything to say, now that you have heard this statement?" The woman coolly replied, "He wanted te see his dead relatives, and, dead or alive, or on horseback, I showed them to him. Mr. Heard had the woman's husband —a blind (?) man—arrested on Friday evening. He travels through the country led along by a "dark" guide, and on heing questioned he acknowledged that his worst day's receipts for some time past was 2s. 9 1/2d., while occasionally they realized six or seven shilllngs in a day. We learned that some time ago the female prisoner gave a neighbouring woman an awful beating, and yet nobody could be got to prosecute her, fearing that she might bewitch themselves or their children. So stand the and the case at present, Mrs. Doheny is remanded, and the investigation stands adjourned until Monday. The prisoner is apparently about 40 years of age, with a good-looking face, though somewhat *passe*, and a mouth particularly expressive of cunning and intelligence.

On yesterday the magistrates decided upon having a full investigation of the charges preferred against Mrs. Doheny at the petty sessions on Thursday. Mr. Heard, S.I., has unravelled some of the dame's mysteries since Saturday, and has found out the *dead* letter office. *Tipperary Free Press.*

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000998/18640910/038/0003
Newry Telegraph - Saturday 10 September 1864

Also in https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000056/18640909/018/0004 Freeman's Journal - Friday 09 September 1864

Also substantially in  https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000435/18640910/106/0004 Dublin Evening Post - Saturday 10 September 1864  (Case of Witchcraft (from our own correspondent) ), cited as being from *Clonmel Chronicle*

A STRANGE CASE OF WITCHERY IN TIPPERARY.

It would appear from recent revelations in Carrick-on-Suir that witchery has not been exorcised there. A remarkable case of its power to unseat rationality has just been brought under the judicial cognisance of the local magistracy, through the energy of Mr. Heard, S.I, and the police. No fewer than seven individuals, two of them members of the Constabulary force of the conntry—are found to be completely subject to the "black art." But we cannot wonder that even the matter-of fact community of our Irish police are not proof against the power of a village enchantress, when modern revelations have shown that no circle has been found too distinguished—no society too learned or too literary— to be drawn within the *spiritual* influence of the world-renowned home, or of the possessor of the famous "Crystal Bull," even in the heart of London, and in this the nineteenth century. Some fourteen months ago, a woman named Mary Doheny, the wife of a blind man, appeared in the town of Carrick-on-Suir, professing to be able to reveal to the living the forms of those supposed to be long ago dead, and among her dupes were two policemen, who, strange to say, implicitly believed in her power, and scrupulously obeyed her behests, It is stated that she has "drugged" her victims, but, be this as it may, they are now entirely under her influence, and have been so completely so, that she had but to command the most ridiculous services, for obedience to follow. The sub-inspector deemed it necessary, from what transpired, to place the woman under arrest, and to obtain the sworn informations of her constabulary dupes. One man, Hayes, a sub-constable, resigned, being convinced, it is stated, that he is shortly to come in for an extensive estate in the neighborhood of Carrick. The other policeman, Reeves, is a marricd man, and lived with his wife and family out of barracks. These were the partics who, through the activity of Mr. Heard, and we should also mention of Constable Prendergast, were brought before the resident magistrate, Mr. Hanna, Mr. Briscoe, J.P., Mr. Jephson, J.P., and Mr. Wilson, J.P., to detail what they knew of the case. As there was, on Thursday last, but a preliminary examination, we will not enter ctupon any lengthened detail of the three hours' investigation which then took place, but will merely give a general outline of what transpired upon oath, The woman Doheny obtained admission into Reeves's family circle nearly twelve months ago, under the pretence that she could cure a little child who was then dying. She gave it herbs; but despite her skill, the little one died, and, strange to say, from that moment, such was the confidence she had won, she lived almost constantly at Reeves's house, ing, drinking, and "bewitching" poor Mrs. Reeves, until the latter, who before had been a fine handsome looking woman, grew pale and emaciated, with peculiarly lustrous but sunken eyes, plainly indicating the infatuation she was under, and in which her husband also shared. It would seem that Mrs. Reeves's father, Wm. Mullins, was buried some years ago, and at a later period, another relative, nemed Tom Sheelham, of Mothill, also died; and Mary Doheny asked her would she wish to see those persons and her own child. Mrs. Reeves said she would, and, accordingly, about two months ago, the old woman brought her and her husband to an unoccupied house near the railway bridge, and at twelve o'clock at night— this they have actually sworn — showed them the three persons *alive*, whom they supposed to be dead. Ever since, with extreme regularity, Reeves and his wife have prepared food, and sent their niece with it to Mrs. Doheny, for the use of their relatives and child who had "come to life." To show the extremity of this infatuation, we will give an extract from the sworn testimony of one of the principal witnesses against the prisoner Doheny, whom the crown is prosecuting:—

Mr. Hanna (to Mrs. Reeves)— What is your name? Mullins is my maiden name, but Reeves by marriage.

Is your father dead? He died about three years ago, and was buried in Carrick-on-Suir, but he is now living in Carrick-on-Suir!

Living! How can you say that? Because I saw him!

Under what circumstances? I had a whisper from him; his voice was heard by night, and afterwards Mrs. Doheny (the prisoner) brought me and showed him to me. She also showed me Tom Sheehan, who was lame, and my own child. They were all alive (sensation in court). I sent them food regularly, and upon one occasion I sent my father my chemise to serve as a shirt for him! (This witness gave her evidence in a clear, collected, and positive manner).

Constable Reeves, a man of about forty-five years of age, was next called, and he swore that he, too, saw the two persons and his little daughter, whom he believed to be dead. There was no doubt whatever upon his mind; there they were where the prisoner pointed them out, and, more than this, she had brought him to a field near the moat of Ballydine, and showed him William Mullins, with whom he had been well acquainted!

The niece was called — a fine intelligent girl she appeared to be — and in a clear voice and unhesitatingly she answered the questions put to her by the magistrates. Having been sworn, she said that every night after dark, she brought tea, milk, bread, and butter and other food, and gave them to her uncle, Tom Sheehan, who she always saw standing under the wall of the old house. The magistrates interrogated her closely, but she persisted in swearing that it was to Tom Sheehan and no one else she gave the food.

Hayes, the retired policeman, came forward, and as positively deposed on oath that he knew some of his own relatives brought to life. Prisoner showed Mullins to him. He believed in ghosts, "For," said he, "I saw one in the County Cork, standing outside the door where a cousin of mine was 'waking.' It is not so extraordinary," he added, "for persons to be raised from the dead."

It is marvellous that in this enlightened age a scene such as we are describing could he found to occur in a court of justice. The magistrates and a crowded audience were positively astounded, and from the remarks which were heard to proceed from several persons—some well dressed and apparently in comfortable circumstances in life—and also from the awe which was written upon the countenances of a still greater number, it appears that many beside the "bewitched" family believe in the supernatural power of the prisoner—this modern Witch of Endor! Mr. Heard, we should have mentioned, brought into court the prisoner's box, found in her house, and it contained three bags filled with letters. Some of these she said she had received from the other world, and her father (who never could write), and some from Captain James Power, of Ballydine, who died some years ago; Captain Power she believed to be really dead. Those letters promised her husband money and a large quantity of land. One of them, from Captain Power, contained a *gold* ring (produced in court). Those letters were sent to Mrs. Doheny, according to arrangement, after being read! This accounts for their being found in the prisoner's box. The prisoner was remanded until to-morrow, when the case will, it is expected, be finally heard so far as the magistrates are concerned. Before the old woman left the dock to be conducted back to prison Constable Reeves advanced towards her and, grasping her by the hand, said, "Never mind, Mary, no matter what they say, I believe what you told me and what I have seen."

Mr Heard, anxious to sift this case to the utmost, with a view to obtain, if possible, evidence sufficient to bring the prisoner to trial—for witchcraft cannot now-a-days be summarily disposed of — is exerting all his ingenuity to secure fresh evidence for the adjourned investigation to-morrow, and some very material facts he has since elicited. It is stated that a very respectable and wealthy farmer, the wife of a shopkeeper, and a milk-woman, are among the infatuated. This case has naturally excited extraordinary interest, and a densely crowded court is expected on Thursday. The most remarkabie part of the story remains to he added. This Constable Reeves may now be seen in the streets of Clonmel — whither he has been transferred‚ walking about with his baton under his arm as one of the preservers of the public peace!!

Reeves, we should observe, is upon every way, except this strange hallucination excedingly collected and sensible, but here reason seems quite unseated. The woman Doheny made up draughts for himself and family, and certainly, since partaking of those potations, they have become more and more infatuated.

We have just received copies of the sworn informations in this extraordinary case. The evidence seems to be sufficiently complete to warrant the committal of the prisoner for trial, and we learn that still further disclosures have been brought to light, through the energy of the constabulary. Mrs. Doheny is also a cow doctress, and during the dry Summer reaped quite a golden harvest of "consolation fees" for miles around. The farmers came, it is said, to her for herbs and charms, to bring back a full supply of milk to their stock. One dairywomen gave her it is asserted, no less than £5, and this liberality she thinks was the means of bringing the rain. This woman, says our correspondent, has duped so many persons, that the Rev. Mr. Power, C.C., convened a of the rnral population, against allowing strangers into their houses or families:

2d September, 1864—Mary Reeves sworn—1864. The defendant, Mrs. Doheny, attended my child when it was sick. She made up bottles for it. The child was not getting better. My father died some years ago—three years ago — and was buried in Rathcormack. His name was William Mullins, of Ross, County Wexford. I saw him in my house in Carrick-on-Suir about two months ago, at about twelve at night. A few nights before that he spoke to me, and said he would return home to me and let me know more. After he appeared to me I sent him a shirt by the defendant, Mrs. Doheny. I also sent hima pair of stockings and food, bread and tea, about forty times. I sent all the things to my father by defendant, Mrs. Doheny. My husband was not present when I sent those things. I told him I had done so. I sent tea and new milk boiled to my father, my child, and my other sisters, who are now all in life in human form. Mary Doheny told me that my sisters and child are alive. About four months ago she told me so. My husband was present and heard her. She also said that when they came they would bring their living with them—that they would bring gold, and that they would have a quantity of land—Dr. Purcell's William Power's, and a great many other poople's. (Signed) MARY REEVES

Mrs. Reeves re-examined—The shirt I sent to my father was made of a night dress of my own. It was my own night dress we altered. It was pierced on the elbow. It had a collar and edging. it myself. My mother spun and knitted the stockings herself. They were long stockings, and woollen; grey woolled. My father sent me the letters now produced, and I gave them to defendant to give back to my father.

2d September, Anastatia Power sworn —I am niece to Mrs. Reeves. She sent me last night, the 1st September, 1864, to a house near the corner of the Green, Carrick-on-Suir, to her father, William Mullins, with bread, butter, and tea. I gave those things to Tom Sheehan. On the night before that I also brought provisions, and gave them to Tom Sheehan at the same place.

James Hayes—Mrs. Doheny pointed out to me Tom Sheehan—who I heard died some years ago— some night last week, leaning on a wall at Duggan's field. I saw Mrs. Mullin and Terence Reeves, as known to me by description given me by Mrs. Reeves. Mrs. Doheny told me the family of Reeves would get property. Defendant told me that I would get land. I heard that William Mullins and Terence Reeves died, and I do believe that I have seen those persons since they died, but I can't say whether they were dead or alive when I did see them. I have seen the ghost of my cousin Crowly many years ago.

3rd September, 1864.—Joseph Reeves—I first became acquainted with the defendant twelve months ago, when she attended my child. She rendered the child great benefit. My father-in-law, William Mullins, died in my house in Carrick-on-Suir last May three years. About three months ago defendant told me to go with her, and that she would show me my father-in-law. I went with her to Green-hill, near Mr. Pierce Power's place. In Michael Gaul's grass field I saw my father-in-law standing in the field. He was within twenty yards of me. I did not speak. I am not sure whether defendant prevented me or not. My son Wm., aged about seven years, died on the 13th April, 1860. About two months ago defendant told me to go to William Duggan's waste house and that I would see him. I did go, with my son Terence, eight years of age. I saw my child William, who died and was buried, standing inside the window. Margaret Power was standing with the child William. She was my sister-in-law, and died about seven years ago. I did not speak to either of them. Mrs. Doheny, the defendant, told me I would see them on a certain night she named. My wife sent bread, butter, tea, meat, and a few potatoes to her father, son, and sister. She gave them into defendant's hands with my consent and approval. Defendant asked my wife to send food. She asked in my presence for the food, and as it was after I had seen William Mullins I consented. It was also after I had seen the son and sister-in-law alive. I received letters from defendant's hand. She said Captain James Power, of Ballydine, wrote the letters, telling me that I would get money and land. Captain James Power died about eight or nine years ago. My belief is that the letters were written in the other world. Defendant told me she got the letters from Captain Power. On one occasion defendant told me to write to Captain Power and send the letter to the moat in Ballydine. I did write, and sent the letter by my child, Terence, and got the answer back. Defendant promised me within the last three months that I would get land in the County Waterford. She said that I should get money. Defendant told me when my relations returned that they would bring gold. Defendant brought me a gold ring from some one that had died. A letter from Captain Power directed me to keep the ring and say nothing about it. Defendant brought back some potatoes, and said that the dead would not use them and to send more, and others were sent. She got tobacco for William Mullins to smoke. I went with my son Terence to within a hundred yards of the moat in Ballydine (four miles from Carrick-on-Suir). Defendant was with us. She told me to stop, and she and my son went forward to the moat, and some time after she called me. The son then told me he had a letter for me, and we returned home. When we came home my son gave me the letter. I have been sending food every day to those that died for about the last six weeks. On several occasions defendant brought back the food and said they did not like it. On one occasion she said the eggs were bad and that my son William would not use them as they took an effect on him. A shirt, trousers, and stockings were sent to my son. I saw my wife giving the trousers to defendant.  
(Signed) Joseph REEVES.  
A.W. H. Heard, complainant; Mary Doheny, defendant.  
Petty Sessions, Carrick-on-Suir, Co. Tipperary, S.R.

The informations of Ellen Walsh, who saith on her oath that a woman, who I believed to be Mary Doheny, came to my lodgings in Grantown Street, in Carrick-on-Suir, several times, and asked me to write letters for her. I wrote letters often for about the last four months for her. The letters now produced, I wrote for the said Mary Doheny, writing down the words she told me. She asked me to change my handwriting—to write like a man. She paid me 3d for each letter; lately she paid me 4d, and 2d for the small ones. She refused to tell me who the messages were from, or to whom they were going. And the said informant binds herself to attend at Carrick-on-Suir Petty Sessions on the 8th Sept., 1864, to prosecute the said Mary Doheny for the said offence, or otherwise to forfeit to the crown the sum of ...  
(Signed) Ellen Walsh.

Taken before me the 4th day of Spet., 1864, at Carrick-on-Suir, in saif count.  
(Signed) S. Hanna, Justice of said County. —*Clonmel Chronicle.*



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003182/18640910/043/0004
Cork Daily Herald - Saturday 10 September 1864

CASE OF WITCHCRAFT. (FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDEMNT.)

Carricn-on-Suir, Thursday.— The usnal fortnighlty petty sessions was held today, before Samuel Hanna, R M, chairman, The Right Hon. the Earl of Busborough, Carberry Scully, T B Wilson, W D Despard, and T Lalor, D L.

THe following gentlemen occupied seats on the bench:— Dr Purcell, medical inspector, Dr Ryan, Rev Mr Ridgeway, Mr O'Donnell, chairman of the Town Commissioners, Mr R Fehon, and Mt John Bushe, son of the late Chief Justice Bushe.

The court house, a small building in that part of the town called Carrickmore, was densely crowded, in consequence of the investigation into the charges preferred against the woman, Mary Doheny, who was placed fa the dock for obtaining money under falee pretences.

She was represented by Mr Vowell.

The first witness called was Sub-Constable Reeves, who deposed that he was a member of the police force, and had been stationed in Carrick-on-Suir, where he became acquainted with the prisoner at the bar about fifteen months ago, when she came to treat a child of his who was suffering from fits. He knew William Mullins, his wife's father, who is dead for the past three years; he was aware of the fact from seeing his corpse at his own house, and seeing it taken away for interment at Rathcormack; he was told by the defendant Doheny that Mullins had come to life, and she asked him to come with her to Knockroe; he went before her, accompanied by his son; she was coming up to where they were standing, and, pointing in a particular direction, asked him if he saw anything; he said yes, he saw his father-in law, who was standing at about twenty yards' distance (great laughter); he was not frightened; he thought the case a rare and a curious one to come before a court of justice; he was acquainted with his father-in-law for sixteen years; at the time he saw him he was standing in the field with a stick in his hand; it was daylight when they went to the field, about eight o'clock in the evening; he did not speak to his father-in-law; he believed that he had now come to life; within the last four months food was sent to him, consisting of bread, batter, and tea, once in the twenty-four hours; never gave any clothing, either by Doheny or his wife's niece, but he believed some had been sent by his wife; on one occasion Doheny got a penny from him for tobacco for old Mullins (laughter); Doheny told him not to speak to the vision which he beheld; was satisfied that it was his father-in-law; his son William died in April, 1862; he was then about nine years of age; saw him about three months ago in a waste building belonging to a man named Duggan, opposite Mr Jepson's gate; Doheny told him to go there and that he would see some person' saw his sister-in-law, Margaret Power, standing next to the window in Duggan's house; she is dead; did not speak to her; got some letters by his son Terence and one also by Mrs. Duggan; his son is eight years of age; the letters he alluded to came from Captain James Power, who died ten years ago; never saw Captain Power, but believed he is in the other world; old Muillins had been in Captain Power's employment and the Captain was very fond of him; was told that Captain James is at present in the moat at Ballydile; walked in at Ballydile; went with his son to the moat; walked in before him and remained for about a quarter of an hour; had given him a letter addressed to Captain James Power; when his son came back from the moat he told him that he had a reply for him; the reply was folded in clean linen handkerchief; his son had it in his bosom, but said that he could not give it to him until they got back to the house; when he returned he handed him a letter; could not say if the letter produced in court is the same, as none of the letters had been dated; had been told or promised that he would get land in the County Waterford: but the particular locality was not mentioned; in one of the letters from Captain James Power he got a ring, which he believed to have been gold; hadn't it about him, but believed is was in his wife's possession; she never wore the ring; some of the food sent for the sustenance of the departed was returned, new potatoes being exchanged for old ones; at one time some eggs that he sent to his little boy were sent back as they were too strong for him.

When cross-examined by Mr Vowell, the witness reiterated the statement that he saw his father-in-law in the field, at Knockroe, and that he was quite satisifed he was alive or coming to life; he saw his sister-in-law, Margaret Power, and his deceased son standing at the window of Duggan's house, but did not address them; he went near the window, and observed that his son had grown considerably; he wore the same clothes, but they did not appear to be worn out.

Mr. Vowell— Do you men to say he wore the same clothes that he died in? 

Witness— He did.

Mr. Vowell— Why, did he die with his clothes on?

Mrs. Reeves—Lord help us! he did, he did.

Witness— Yes, he died in his chair; he was then only about seven years of age; when I saw him at the window, I thought he looked pale and sickly, but he was always a delicate child; I am sure Captain Power is not alive, but I believe he is in the moat; at Ballydile I believe my people in-law are with the "gentry," or, as we commonly call them, "the good people". I expect to get gold from them when they return to life; my son is dead three or four years; Margaret Power died seven years ago; she was dressed also; she did not speak to me; I was looking at her for full ten minutes; I believe she was alive at the time of her appearance; my son did not ask me to come with him.

Mrs. Reeves, wife of Constable Reeves, deposed that Mrs Doheny first came to her in reference to the curing of her child, who was suffering from fits; the father, she said, who died about three years ago, appeared to her at twelve o'clock at night in her own house, but she did not speak to him. He led her to believe that he would could to her again in perfection; she was in bed at the time, but not asleep; told the circumstance as is occurred, in the morning; did not speak to Mrs. Doheny in reference to any matter but the illness ot her child up to that period; when she became aware that her father was in life, she sent him a night dress and a pair of stockings; she also sent him some food through Mrs. Doheny, which consisted of bread, tea and new milk; the tea was not liked at first; heard her three sisters speaking to him; their names were Margaret, who died seven years ago, Ellen, who died eleven years ago, and Bridget, who died three and a half years ago; these were speaking to him at her door; it was at her suggestion that the food was sent; she merely asked Mrs Doheny what quality of food she should send, and she told her bread, butter, and such like.

To Mr. Wilson—I never got drinks or doses of any description from the defendent; she gave me some herbs in mil for my child; I never gave her a shilling for the dead people; never paid her for curing my child or attempting to cure her; the only money I ever gave her was a penny; I got several letters through my son, by Mrs Doheny, and by my niece; I kept the letters until last Wednesday week, when Mrs Doheny came to me and said they were required back by the family, but that she wou!d return them to me again at a proper time; she told me my sister was alive; at one time she said my son was too delicate to eat the new potatoes and eggs which hed been sent; I changed the diet next, and sent some tea; after a fortnight a quantity of tea was returned, to be replaced by fresh tea; she believed everything she was saying to be the truth; she also was shown Tom Sheehan, who when in the flesh had been a friend of her husband's.

Cross-examined by Mr. Vowell—Captain Power wrote the letters for my father who, did not know how to write himself. Captain Power is in the moate at Ballydile. Tom Sheehan gave the first letter that we got to my son. He died some time ago. Mrs. Doheny was present when my son brought the letter into the house. I did not open it, but I said—"Who can this letter be from?" Mrs. Doheny remarked that it must be from Captain James Power, because he was in the moate at Ballydile. I heard my sister Margaret speaking to me three times. I did not answer her. It was about nine o'clock at night. I believe she was then with the "gentry," or "good people." She is living with them now fm their own state. I knew my sister's voice. My son was talking to me for three quarters of an hour. I did not believe he was on earth as an earthly person, but that he was one of the "good people" or "gentry." I cannot tell why I did not ask him to come in. I believe my father is living now, and when the proper time comes round that he will come back to me.

James Hayes was sworn, and deposed that he had been a policeman, and was stationed in Carrick-on-Suir; he left the police force about two months ago, as he had become embarrassed, thinking he could pay his debts better by working at his trade; knows Mrs. Doheny, to whom he often gave charity; had heard of Tom Sheehan and and William Mullins, but did not know them personally; from the description he got of the former, he believes he saw him standing on a wall near Duggan's house (here the witness decribed very accurately the particular pose of the ghostly visitant); did know `[sic]` William Mullins or William Reeves, except according to the description given him by Mrs Doheny; went out to a field at the rere of the courthouse towards the railway, accompanied by Reeves and Mrs Doheny some months ago; could not say if Reeves or Doheny pointed out the direction to him, but whichever them directed his attention to it, he certainly saw the figure of a man in the field; he believed that man to have been William Mullins, but could only conjecture so from the description he got; gave Mrs Doheny food on more than one occasion; she never directly promised him that he would get land; believed he said something to that effect in his examination on Friday last, but it was a mistake; heard her alluding to the fact that Reeves would come in for land, and thinks she intimated that he would also.

To Mr, Heard, sub-inspector—I never got a bottle of medicine from the defendant; I never gave her a shilling for a bottle of any particular stuff; I made a copy of the letter produced at the request of Mary Doheny and Mrs Reeves; the original I believe was sent to Captain Power, and signed by sub-constable Reeves.

The letter alluded to was read by Hayes, but it was a perfectly unconnected fumble of mere nonsense.

On being cross-examined by Mr. Vowell—Hayes said that he considered he was clear in his senses, and that if he was ever "hesy" he was not aware of the fact; he saw a ghost before; it was that of a frined of his named Crowly, who resided in the county Cork; saw Sheehan, or a person whom he believed to have been Sheehan from a description he got of him, between the hours of 8 and 10 o'clock; he did not think that too early for a ghost to come out (great laughter); it was at 11 o'clock at night that he saw Crowly.

The informations of a young woman named Ellen Walsh were read to her, by which it appeared that she wrote the letters which were handed into court, and which letters purported to be from Captain Power and other deceased friends. She got fourpence a piece for the long letters, and twopence and threepence for the short ones.

Miss Doran, on being sworn, deposed that the woman Doheny came into her house and asked her sister to write a letter for her; her sister being busy, when she (Mrs Doheny) asked her to write it, which she did, not knowing for what or for whom it was intended.

Only a limited number of the witnesses were called, and Mr. Vowell briefly addressed the Bench for the prisoner. He described the whole thing from beginning to end as a wretched farce, which he was quite sure would not admit of reproduction, and in which he wished the curtain should fall immediately. He thought there was not a particle of evidence to prove that the woman had obtained the food and money under false pretences, they having been voluntarily tendered by the parties themselves, and on these grounds he would ask their worships to deal with the case summarily.

The magistrates, however, were unanimous in sending her for trial before the Chairman of the Quarter Sessions, at Clonmel, next month.

The prisoner, who listened attentively to the evidence adduced, fainted several times before the proceedings were brought to a close, and had to be removed from the dock by the constables. She had an infant in her arms. This evening she was brought up from Carrick, and safely lodged in *durance vile* in Clonmel gaol, where she will await her trial.

Carrick-on-Suir, Friday.— Sub-constable Reeves and ex-Constable Hayes, together with Mrs Reeves and the other parties still continue to their firm belief in all that the *soi disant* Mrs Mary Doheny, has either said or done during her intimacy with them. The prisoner is a low sized, small-featured, cunning-looking woman, and appears perfectly competent to dupe a dozen such confiding mortals as those she has had dealings with. The Captain Power whose name figures so prominently in the several depositions made before the magistrates is, or rather was when *in carne*, the grandfather or granduncle (we are not quite certain which) of the present Edward de la Poer, Esq, D L, of Gurteen. Mrs Doheny told Mr Jepson, one of the presiding justices at the first investigation, that she would raise the spirit of his deceased father if he would permit her; but Mr Jepson declined the pleasure of an interview under such circamstances. The Rev. Mr Power, one of the local clergymen, endeavoured to persuade the woman to abandon her foolish practices, but without avail. She offered him a small bottle containing some liquid to drink out of it, assuring him that if he drank some of it he would know just as much as Reeves! The moate alluded to in the evidence brought forwarded, appears to have been a sort of 'general post office' for the transmission of letters between the living and the dead, or rather to speak technically, the "gentry," or good people, who are not believed to be absolutely defunct, but inhabiting a sort of middle sphere. There was a kind of underground passage in this moate, tunnelled through the earth, and having openings at both ends. The letters addressed by Sub-constable Reeves and others, to the departed were shoved in at one end of this tunnel (we will call it, so far want of a better name), and the replies were produced in due time at the other end, Mrs D. acting as post mistress, extraordinary, sometimes delivering the answers in person to Reeves and co., at other times sending them by Reeves' young son. The whole affair forms the subject of extensive discussion in the neighbourhood of Carrick and Clonmel.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000504/18640917/009/0003
Manchester Times - Saturday 17 September 1864

WITCHORAFT IN TIPPERARY. A case of this description came before the magistrates sitting on Thursday at Carrick-on-Suir. The reputed witch, Mary Doheny, was placed in the dock, and she had an infant, a few months old, in her arms. She is the wife of a blind man, and has been in the neighbourhood about fourteen months. Tho principal witnesses, a constable named Reeves, and his wife said that the prisoner lived with them "almost constantly, eating, drinking, and 'bewitching' Mrs. Reeves, until she has grown, who before had been a fine, handsome looking woman, pale and emaciated, with peculiarly lustrous but sunken eyes." The father of Mrs. Reeves was a man named Mullins, who died some years ago. The "witch," about two months since, brought Reeves and his wife to "an unoccupied house near the railway bridge, and at twelve at night—this they have actually sworn to— showed them the father and child of Mrs. Reeves and another relative, Tom Sheehan, actually alive!" Ever since, with extreme regularity, Reeves and his wife have prepared food and sent their niece with it to Mrs. Doheny, for the use of their relatives and the child who had "come to life." Mrs. Reeves swore her father "died about three years ago, and was buried in Carrick on-Suir: but he is now living in Carrick-on-Suir." When asked how she could say that, she answered, "Because I saw him. I had a whisper from him; his voice was heard by night, and afterwards Mrs. Doheny brought me and showed him to me. She also showed me Tom Sheehan, who was lame, and my own child. They were all alive. I sent them food regularly, and upon one occasion I sent my father my chemise to serve as a shirt for him!" Mrs. Reeves gave her evidience in a clear, collected, and positive manner. Her niece, who took the food to Tom Sheehan, swore positively that she gave the food to him and no one else. Hayes, a retired policeman, came forward, and as positively deposed on oath that he knew some of his own relatives brought to life. Prisoner showed Mullins to him. He believed in ghosts; "for," said he, "I saw one of the county Cork, standing outside the door where a cousin of mine was walking." "It is not so extraordinary," he added, "for persons to be raised from the dead." As the case proceeded the prisoner fainted, or pretended to do so. The people in court seemed to have very little sympathy for her, and many of them are said to have appeared awe-struck.— The magistrates committed her to the quarter sessions on a charge of having obtained money under false pretences.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001320/18640924/004/0001
Glasgow Saturday Post, and Paisley and Renfrewshire Reformer - Saturday 24 September 1864

THE TIPPERARY WITCH. There is something much more pleasant and touching about the Irish rustic superstitions than there is about the English. Superstition makes the English boor simply brutal and pitiless, while in the Irish peasant it excites the lively credulous imagination of a child. The belief in fairies or kindly preternatural agencies has wholly vanished from England, while the belief in demons or the black art still lingers to a considerable extent. How different the state of feeling is in Ireland the very curious examination of three or four "bewitched" people before the magistrates of Carrick-on-Suir,Tipperary, Thursday week will sufficiently show. The witch was one Mrs Mary Doheny, the wife of blind man, who appeared at Carrick-on-Suir about fourteen months ago with a reputation for preternatural powers which she soon began to sustain and increase. The charge against her was cheating certain persons afterwards examined in court, and who were evidently far from admitting that they had been cheated all, out of subsidies not in money but in food, on the false pretence that they were for the support of deceased relatives of the contributors recently restored to life—or sufficiently so to need food. The scene in the Court House of Carick-on-Suir was a very curious one. People of all ranks thronged from all sides to hear the examination, and even the most educated persons present were, it is said, in parts of the evidence visibly awestruck and confounded by the siomple faith and earnest testimony of more than one witness to the preternatural facts alleged. The witnesses called against Mrs Doheny certainly testified to the continuous stream of subsidies with which they had supplied her for their rather uncomfortably situated relatives—who appear to have *half* got back from the grave, but still to be, if we may so term it, spiritual invalids living on earth, but in mysterious seclusion amongst the "good people," and preparing on a mild diet of tea and other food generally known to the medical profession as "slops" for their more active return to life; but while they gave this evidence they not only imputed no falsehood to Mrs Doheny, but were even eager in their simple faith that the subsidies had actually been needed and consumed by their half-reanimated kinsmen, whom they had, they said, seen with their own eyes. There is something inexpressibly childlike about the whole story. In reading it we feel as if we were present at the birth of one of those Irish fairy legends related with much spirit by Mr Lover, in which humpbacks sleeping in haunted moats so please the "good people" as not only to get rid of their humps but have them transferred to the persons of their cruel enemies, or banshees flit round decaying mansions wailing forth the deathsong of some one of its inmates. There were no fewer apparently than five independent witnesses who asserted that they had seen the forms of relatives long dead restored life, always it appears in Mrs Doheny's presence, though she does not seem to have claimed any power in the matter. The first witness was "Sub-Constable Joseph Reeves," who stated that after Mrs Doheny's appearance at Carrick-on-Suir some fourteen months ago she began to doctor his child for him with herbs. The child was afflicted with epilepsy, and Mrs Doheny's remedies certainly gained it quieter sleep, he thought, that it had ever had before. But after this little experiment in the healing art, in which she does not appear have been strikingly successful, she seems to have diverted her energies into more exciting channels. We are told that one night at twelve o'clock, while Mrs Doheny's medical attentions were being directed to the child, Mrs Reeves, the wife of the sub-constable, had a vision when she was "in bed, but not asleep," of her deceased father Mr Mullins, who said "he would return home to me in perfection"—whatever that may have meant. Mrs Doheny "had not said anything to me of my father till I told her this circumstance," but the remark appears to have been carefully laid up in Mrs Doheny'a heart, and to have suggested the important change of her "base of operations" from administering physical sedatives to the child to administering spiritual stimulants to the parents. After the hint dropped by Mrs Reeves, that her father would return to her "in perfection," Mrs Doheny appears to have made statements the effect that he *had* returned to life, and would soon manifest himself to his daughter and her family. About four months or more ago "Sub-Constable Joseph Reeves" was asked by Mrs Doheny go with her Knockroe, where he would see his late father-in-law. The man, accompanied by his boy Terence, a child of eight years of age, started, but on getting to Knockroe appears to have seen nothing till Mrs Doheny came up ten minutes after him, when pointing in a particular direction she asked Reeves if he saw anything. I replied, 'Yes,' for I saw father in-Law William Mullins, who had been dead three years, about 20 yards distant from me." Asked by the magistrate whether he was frightened, Reeves replied simply. "I was not, sir; this rare case in a court of justice, and a laughable one to some people, but there have been instances of the kind before." He had known his father-in-law, he said, for 16 years, and "ought" to know him. "We remained looking at him for time; he was standing in the field with a stick in his hand; his side-face was turned towards me. There was good light at the time, about eight o'clock in the evening. I don't think William Mullins is dead now, but he *was* dead. I have been sending him food for the last four months since he came to life. I sent bread, butter, and tea once in each of the twenty-four hours, sometimes by the defendant and sometimes by my wife's niece. Defendant asked in my presence for the food, and as it was after I had seen William Mullins alive, I consented." Reeves further said that he had lost a son named William, who had died at seven years of age in 1860. Two months ago Mrs Doheny told him "to go Duggan's waste-house and I would see him." This he did, again with his son Terence, and he asserts that they both saw his late son William standing inside the window with his dead aunt (Margaret Power) who had died about seven years ago. "They came to the window and I walked up to it, —there was only the glass between us. . . The boy Terence remarked to me when they came to the window, 'There's Will and his aunt.'" We may casually note here the remarkably tenacious memory of the living boy Terence, who is only eight years old. His little brother had died when he was only four years old, and his aunt when he was only *one* year old; but he recognises them at once. The dead or risen boy was said to be in the same clothes in which he died. The magistrate, asking if the lad had had his clothes on when he died, his mother, who was sitting in court, cried out, "Oh, God help us! he had, he had!" and Reeves goes on, "Yes, he died in his chair; he appeared to me to have grown since he died; he did not look very badly, though he was delicate; he had no hat on." Of the aunt he says that she did not wear a crinoline, "they were not in fashion when she died," —but we are not assured whether she died in those clothes or has dressed *since*.There also appears to have been a separate manifestation of some of these deceased persons to Mrs Reeves. Mrs Doheny, she said, brought her father "and showed him me. She also showed me Tom Sheehan (a deceased relative of Reeves), who was lame, and my own child. They were all alive." The niece of Mrs Reeves, who is described as a "fine, intelligent girl," also swore positively that every night, —but "after dark," — she brought tea, milk, butter, bread, and other food, and gave them to her uncle Tom Sheehan, who was always standing under the wall of the old "waste-house." She swore positively that it was to her deceased uncle Tom Sheehan, and no one else, that she delivered the food. A fifth witness was ex-policeman, James Hayes, but as he had known none of the deceased parties in their lifetime except by description, his evidence only proved that he had seen persons whom he believed on his friends' word to be dead people restored to life. These persons still appear to in a very delicate state. The dead father Mullins indeed seems to be hearty, under the protection of the "good people," smokes, and can manage new potatoes and eggs. But "Mrs Doheny said my sisters and son were too delicate to eat new potatoes and eggs, and I changed the diet next night." Some tea was sent back as not good enough for the wards of the fairies, two months ago, and fresh tea of a better quality was substituted. William Mullins wanted clothes but once; and then he made shift with one of his daughter's *chemises* for a shirt. The promise held out by Mrs appears to be that ail these shadowy forms now undergoing their novitiate for a second earthly life in the deserted house near the moat of Ballydine will, after due assimilation respectively of new potatoes, eggs, and bread and milk by the harder men, and superior tea by the boy and women, be able to come back quite to life, and that whenever that occurs, they will "bring their living with them," —an event apparently much to be desired, as the intermediate state is rather expensive to relations who are still enjoying their *first* lease of life, and on whom it is rather hard to ask them to work so hard for relatives who are about to enjoy their second. However, when they *quite* return to life they are to bring not only money but "land in the county of Waterford"—or perhaps rather the *title* to it—with them, which is certainly a consolatory hope; only as the title can only have been gained by a conveyance effected in the other world, it must still be a haraasing doubt to the sub-constable whether earthly lawyers will recognize its validity.—*Spectator.*

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001650/18641026/054/0002
Waterford Mirror and Tramore Visitor - Wednesday 26 October 1864

*The Carrick Witch.*— Mary Doheny, the old lady who set "Carrick and the country" in a blaze by her "witchcraft," was convicted at Clonmel quarter sessions on Wednesday, and sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000357/18641029/011/0003
Illustrated Times - Saturday 29 October 1864

The Carrick Witch. —Mary Doheny, known the "Carrick Witch," was tried at the Clonmel Quarter Sessions last week for fraudulently obtaining goods from Joseph and Mary Reeves, at Carrick-on-Suir, on the 1st of June, 1864. Mary Reeves deposed that the prisoner had attempted to cure one of her children with herbs boiled in new milk, and continued attending the house for that purpose nearly every day during ten months. She said she used to see her dead father and other dead members of the witness's family in the Moate, at Balleydine, and, as a proof, the prisoner said that the witness was to get a note for them, which Captain James Power was to write for them. The witness's child was sent for the note, and several letters were received purporting to come from the deceased relatives. The prisoner next said she wanted bread, butter, and tea for the people in the Moate, and these were daily supplied during four months. The witness also fancied that she saw her own deceased father. He was sitting in a chair opposite the door, quite near her, having on blue coat, knee breeches, and hat. He said three times he was going, and that he would return with plenty; and the prisoner said he was going with "the gentry," but would return. The prisoner often asked the witness for wine and spirits. Since her arrest there had been no appearance from the other world. The husband of this woman, Joseph Reeves, sub-constable, was as great a dupe as his wife. He said that he saw and knew his father-in-law, who was only twenty yards from him. He believed that the man had come to life, and thought he had a ghostly appearance. He never saw a dead man standing before. He saw his son also in an empty house, where he was brought by the prisoner. He, too, had a ghostly appearance, and had not the shape of a living person, and the prisoner stated that it would take a considerable time for him to come to perfcction. The jury found the prisoner "Guilty." Mr. Sergeant Howley, who presided on the Bench, stated that he had been informed by Mr. Beard, sub-inspcctor of constabulary, that the dead persons had been personated by the prisoner's blind husband, and a man who led him about. One of the apparitions was at dark, and the other in the night. The prisoner then cried, "Oh, my Lord, think of my poor blind man and poor children!" and the Court answered, "You are a terrible woman and a dangerous impostor. You must be confined in gaol for twelve months, and kept hard labour."
