# Wassail

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18361105/019/0004
Hereford Times - Saturday 05 November 1836

HEREFORDSHIRE CUSTOMS.

While we are investigating the various manners and customs of foreign lands, we are frequently ignorant or unobservant of those of our own counties, some of which are not without interest. To illustrate the foregoing remark, we shall describe certain customs which prevail in Herefordshire, and one which is practised in Devonshire. Their observation is still held by the humbler classes to be of considerable importance, and they lead to much rustic hilarity and enjoyment. From the gradual diffusion of knowledge, and the rapidity of communication, introducing the manners of the towns into the country, these customs, so characteristic of other times, are day day gradually declining in the rural districts, and it appears probable that the time will soon come when they will be totally disregarded.

Burning the Bush.— On the 1st of January, in that part of Herefordshire contiguous to Leominster, the men attached to each farm procure a long pole which they bind with straw all the way up, and place on the highest ground of the farm; a large truss of straw fixed on the summit, and several trusses at the lower end; for this purpose barley straw is generally employed, it being less combustible than that of wheat. The straw is then kindled, and the men regale themselves with cider and cakes; a hawthorn bush is afterwards cut, which having singed in the fire, they return home, taking the bush to the farm-house, where it is given to the master, who hangs it up in the kitchen more cider distributed among the men, and the bush remains till the following year, when it is replaced by new one, the old bush being destroyed. The early hour of five in the morning is usually chosen for the ceremony, and the day is enjoyed as a holiday.

On every farm on Twelfth-eve, the farmer, his friends, and servants assemble and proceed to field of wheat, where twelve fires are lighted on twelve ridges of wheat, the thirteenth and largest being kindled on the highest ground. The attendants, whose numbers sometimes exceed forty, headed by the master of the family, pledge the company in cider, which circulates very freely. The men at intervals shout the name of the master with the addition of "for ever," and "huzza," which is responded to similar shouting and hallooing, induced by the like occasion on other farms. It is considered unlucky if this ceremony is omitted.

Previous to Twelfth-eve the mistress of the house prepares number of flat cakes about the size of twopenny breakfast cakes, each having a hole in the centre —these are taken by the servants and visitors to the stalls where the oxen are kept; they also provide themselves with a pail of cider and a number of glasses and jugs. A cake is then placed on one of the horns of the first or finest ox, when each man fills his glass and says—

"Here's to thee, Brown Boy `[Name of the ox.]`, with thy lily-white horn,  
Pray God send thy master a good crop of corn  
Both wheat, rye, and barley, and all sorts of grain,  
And if I live till this time twelvemonth I'll drink to thee again."

A small quantity of cider is thrown from one of the glasses up the nostrils of the ox, which makes it snort and throw the cake from its horn. If the cake falls in front of the animal, it belongs to the man who drives the ox; but if behind, it is the perquisite of the boy who attends the team. This is repeated with every ox, and it is common trick for the boy to prick the animal with a pin just as the cider is thrown, to make it turn round, and jerk the cake back so that he may obtain it.

When this is concluded with every ox, the party adjourn to the cow-house, where similar proceedings take place with regard to the cows, except that the dairy-maid and the cow-boy receive the cakes respectively as they fall before or behind the animal. The master and mistress of the house are present, and the whole concludes by drinking their healths. These ceremonies usually succeed the thirteen fires.

In Devonshire an ancient custom is still observed on Christmas Eve, which is supposed to ensure a good crop of apples. The farm servants procure an ash faggot, round which they carefully put as many binds as possible, because they are rewarded with cups of cider equivalent in number to the binds which encircle the faggot. The faggot is then placed on the fire, and as each bind bursts, they claim a cup of cider; they have also a bowl of toast and cider which they take into the orchard, and putting a piece of the toast on the king or principal appletree, repeat the following lines:—

Apple-tree, we wassail thee,  
To bear and to blow apples enow,  
Hats full, caps full,  
Three bushel bags full, hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!

It appears that exactly the same words arc not always used on this occasion, different version being given in the 'Gentleman's Magazine,' 1791.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000396/18470109/024/0005
Hereford Times - Saturday 09 January 1847

A Night's Adventure, or Twelfth Eve at Baysham.— Those who remember the evening of Tuesday, the 5th inst., will grant that it required more than ordinary courage to undertake a country walk of three miles, after dark, across fields and along bye-roads without a light and through the pelting of the pitiless storm, merely to see Twelfth Eve's festivities as they are at Baysham, and as they were centuries ago throughout the country. Such courage, reader, was ours, for so bent were we on witnessing for once in our lives the old Christmas customs of our country that no raving of the elements would have daunted us; so with staff in hand we sallied forth, heedless of the rain above or the mire beneath. The night was pitchy dark, and therefore favourable for the first act in the drama we were about to witness. On gaining an eminence we obtained an excellent view of the 12 fires kindled in gratitude for the past harvest and in hope for the future on some newly sown wheat field. On either hand, before, and behind, appeared, blazing in the gloom of night, these majestic fires, and ever and anon came the cheer "Old cider for ever," with due honour to the worthy master and mistress of the farm. Trudging on, now down a slippery bank and then up the opposite hill, our path enlightened for a quarter of a mile at least by the brilliant fires at Baysham, more conspicuous than all the rest, at length reached that hospitable mansion. Around the largest fire, which makes the thirteenth, called by the country people "The Old Woman," were gathered the labourers of the farm and some of the villagers, whom darkness and the storm could not prevent from partaking of the good cheer most liberally and freely provided, where all were welcome guests. One old veteran, of some six feet or more suffered the discharge of a double barreled gun close to his ear without moving a muscle, to the great delight of the juveniles of the party, and as the echo of each cheer died away in the distance another volley reverberated through the vale, till the wide expanse resounded with the praises of the benevolent proprietors of Baysham. This over, we joined the quiet within, where a sumptuous repast graced the board, open to all comers. We could not, however, partake of creature comfort ourselves, till we had seen the provision made for the labourers and harvest-men on the estate, who to the number of 45 were seated around the tables in the great kitchen, smiling with longing eyes the good things of the feast; nor was smiling all, for at the word of command, such slaughter commenced as Waterloo never saw, yet a more peaceful and harmless one; the benevolent countenances of Mr. and Mrs. Jones sparkling with animation the scene. This concluded, the party split into sections, the more lively tripping on the "light fantastic toe," and the elder enjoying a rubber of whist or something less difficult and hazardous. Nor was the poor village "simple one" forgotten, whose antics set the table in roar, and whose appetite for dancing seemed insatiate. A few well selected songs and glees, and a band consisting of violin, violincello, flute, and horn, enlivened the evening. But, hark! the clock strikes twelve, the hour —when midges dance—when wonders are performed— when the oxen, in honour of Him who was cradled in manger, are said to fall upon their knees and pray, though we must confess we have no faith in either—had arrived, and now for the entertainment of the season, the "wassail bowl," and many of our readers may never witness that ceremony in the practical age when railways are making inroads upon our country, and education upon the customs of our ancestors, we will describe it as we saw it. The favourite cow is brought forth, and a cake placed upon her horn, whilst the most favoured guest drinks from the wassail bowl to her health, in the following terms:

"Here's to thee, Nanny, and to thy white horn,  
The Lord send thy master good crop corn,  
Both wheat, rye, and barley, and all sorts of grain,  
And if we live till another year, we'll drink to thee again;  
Thou eat thy barley, and I'll drink my baer,  
The Lord send us all happy new year."

The remainder of the liquor is then thrown into the animal's face, *sans ceremonie*, which makes her start, and toss the cake from her horn: it falls behind her, it becomes the property of the cowherd,—if before, the boy's. On the present occasion, her health was drunk by Mr. Powell, of Fawley, Mr. Jones, and Mr. Verry, and the cake was caught behind by one of the workmen, and distributed among the company. Returning to the house, we found the doors fastened, and, according to custom, could only be opened by a song or carol. This was soon complied with, and each returned to his favourite amusement, and we to our home, reflecting upon our night's adventure, and wishing the return of many such seasons to the happy family at Baysham.

