The Wish Ring

?Hofmann, Miracle Garden.

A young farmer , who was not making any headway in the business , sat on his plow and rested for a moment to wipe the sweat from his face . Then an old pere came sneaking past and called out to him: "Why are you toiling and still getting nowhere?" Rarely go out for two days until you come to a large fir tree that stands freely in the forest and towers over all the other trees. If you turn it over, your luck is made. The farmer didn't need to be told twice, took his hatchet and set off. After two days he found the fir. He immediately set about felling it , and the moment it fell and fell violently to the ground , a nest with two eggs fell out of its highest treetop . The eggs fell on the ground and broke , and as they broke , a young eagle came out of one egg , and a small golden ring fell out of the other . The eagle grew steadily until it was probably half a man's height, shook its wings as if trying them, rose a little above the ground and then cried: You have redeemed me! As a thank you, take the ring that was in the other gi! It is a wish ring. If you turn a finger and make a wish, it will soon come true. But there is only one wish in the ring. So think carefully about what you wish for so that you don't regret it afterwards. Then the eagle flew high in the air, hovered for a long time in large strips over the farmer's head, and then shot like an arrow towards the morning. The farmer took the ring, put it on his finger and started to go home. When it was evening he arrived at a town; there the goldsmith was in the shop and had a lot of fſts

lic rings for sale . Then the farmer showed him his ring and asked him what it was worth. " A cardboard stick ! " said the goldsmith. Then the farmer laughed out loud and told him that it was a wishing ring and was worth more than all the rings together that Fener had for sale. But the oldsmith was a wrong, big man. He invited the farmer to come over Staying with him at night said: "To shelter a man like you with such treasures brings good luck; stay with me!" took the ring off his finger unnoticed and put an ordinary ring on him instead. The next morning the goldsmith could hardly wait for the farmer to leave. He woke him up early in the morning and said: "You still have a wide one It's better if you get up early." As soon as the farmer was gone, he hurriedly went into his room, closed the shutters so that nobody would lay anything, then bolted the door behind him too, I told him I walked into the middle of the room, turned the ring and cried: "I want a hundred thousand thalers right away." "Hardly had he said this when it began to rain thalers, hard, shiny thalers, as if it were pouring with hollows, and the thalers hit his head, shoulders and arms. He started screaming pitifully and wanted to jump to the door, but before he could reach it and unlock it, he fell to the ground, bleeding all over his body. But the rain of thalers never ended, and soon the floorboards collapsed under the load, and the goldsmith fell into the deep cellar with the money. Then it kept raining until the hundred thousand were full, and then the goldsmith lay dead in the cellar with all that money on him. The neighbors rushed over to hear the noise, and when they found the goldsmith lying dead among the money, they said: "It's a great misfortune when the blessing comes so thick! "Then the heirs also came and shared. Meanwhile the farmer went home happily and showed his wife the ring. Now it can't be missing, dear wife," he said. " Our luck is made . We just want to think carefully about what we want to wish for. But the woman knew good advice right away. What do you mean if we wish for a little more vein? We have so little.

A swidel just reaches between our veins; we want to wish for that. That would be worth the trouble," replied the man. "If we work hard for a year and are lucky, we might be able to buy it." Then husband and wife worked with all their might for a year, and the harvest had it has never poured out like this time, so that you could buy the gusset and still have an hour's money left over. "You see!" said the man, "we have the dagger, and the wish is still free. Then the woman said it would be good if you wished for a rest and a horse. Madam," replied the man again, rattling the remaining money in his big pocket, "what do we want to forgive our wishes for such a slob. We'll get the cow and the horse the same way. "And right, after another year the chair and the horse were well deserved. Then the man rubbed my hands happily and said: "Another trip saved the wish and got everything that one wished for. How lucky we are ! " But the wife seriously persuaded her husband to finally go after the wish . I don't know you at all," she said angrily. In the past you always complained and had pity and wished for everything possible, and wherever you can have it as you want it, you toil and lock yourself up, are satisfied with Adem and let the best years pass. King, emperor, count, you could be a great farmer, have all your coffers full of money - and you can't make up your mind what you want to choose. "Stop your constant hustle and bustle," replied the farmer. We are both young and life is long. There is only one wish in the king and it is soon done. Who knows what will happen to us again when we need the ring . Are we missing something? Haven't we come up so since we've had the king that everyone is amazed? Aijo ſei understanding. In the meantime you can always think about what we could wish for. “That was the end of it for the time being. And it really was as if the full blessing had come into the house with the ring, because the rubbing and pounding became more frequent from year to year

boller and fuller, and after a long series of years the small, poor farmer grew into a big, fat farmer who worked and worked with the servants throughout the day as if he wanted to earn the whole world, but after vespers he was sedentary and Sat contentedly in front of the front door and let the people wish me good evening. Year after year went by like that. Now and then, when they were all alone and no one heard, the wife still reminded her husband of the ring and made all sorts of suggestions. But since he always replied that there was still plenty of time and that the best thing always comes to mind, it became increasingly rare, and in the end it hardly ever happened that the ring was even spoken of. Although the farmer himself turned the ring on his finger twenty times a day and looked at it, he was careful not to express a wish. And thirty or forty years passed, and the farmer and his wife were old and white as snow, but the wish was still not fulfilled. God showed them mercy and let them both die happily in one night. Children and child finders stood around their two coffins and wept, and when one of them wanted to pull off the ring, the eldest son said: Let the father take his ring with him to the grave. He has had a secret with him all his life. It must be a dear keepsake. And the mother also looked at the ring so often; in the end she had given it to her father when she was young. " So the old farmer was buried with the ring, which was supposed to be a wishing ring and wasn't one, and yet had brought as much luck into the world as a person could only wish for. Because it is a separate matter with what is right and what is wrong; and bad things in good hands are still worth much more than good things in bad hands.