# Witchcraft


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001643/18400919/073/0004
Macclesfield Courier and Herald - Saturday 19 September 1840

WITCHCRAFT IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.—The IS'orcester Chronicle says :—The following lamentable instance of superstition occurred in Idch•street, in this city, on Saturday last :—The infant daughter of Thos. Pitt, a labourer, residing in the above street, had for some tune been suffering from severe inflammation 011ie fare and gums, conseqseet on the process of 'teething,' and the usual domestic remedies having proved wassailing, the mother of the child was induced, by the pressing solicitations of the neighboaring gossips seek the abode of a certain • wise woman,' • Witch of Sudbury,' for the purpose of having her infant 'charmed,' a process which, it was averred, would speedily eradicate the disorder. Manifold were the testimonies borne in favour of the charm,' and numerous instauces adduced where the restoration of strayed cattle, the cure of broken heads, and the detection of stolen properly, had been achieved by mesas of its potent influence. Accordingly, baying previously fortified herself against the machinations of 'the gentleman in black,' by attaching a sprig of rosemary sod a leaf of the Bible to the hem of her garment, the creditless parent bent her steps towards the dwelling of the reputed' witch,' to whom she made known the purport of her The • weird sister,' after indulging in several mysterious shakes or the head, crossings of the palm,uod other 'mores of equally cabalistic import, took the infant in her arms, and commenced the ceremony of 'charming.' This consisted in sprieklieg the bead of the child with common salt, and affixing round its neck a strip of virgin parchment, accompanying the operation by a species of low monotonous chaunt, occasionally varied by a rapid envoriatioe of incoherent gibberish, which savoured strongly of the ravings of insanity. At the conclusion of this absurd farce, which lasted about ten minutes, the' wise woman' resigned the child to the care of its maternal protector, gravely ?? ing her not only of its speedy recovery, owing to the sovereign of the • charm,' but of its nature exemption nom • the thoessod ills that flesh is heir to.' And--auch'is the power of superstition—the mother of the infant not only entertains a devout belief is the cacy of the above named rite, but loudly vaunts the benefit already derived horn it in the present case, her dear little child having, as she affirms, recovered most *charm*-ingly since her recent visit to the 'Witch Of Sudbury'.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000393/18751218/036/0005
Gloucestershire Chronicle - Saturday 18 December 1875
WITCHCRAFT IN WARWICKSHIRE. EXTRAORDINARY TRIAL FOR MURDER. At the Warwick winter assists on Wednesday, before Baron Bramwell, James Haywoiel, 45, a half-witted farm labourer, was indicted for having murdered Ann Tennant, at Long Compton (Warwickshire, near the border of Gloucestershire), on the sth of September. Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Chamberlayne were for the prosecution, and Mr. Bustard, at the request of the Judge, defended. John Tennant, • labourer, liviug at Long Compton, said he would be seventy-nine years of age " come Christmas-day." The deceased was his wife, end " come April next" she would have been eighty years of age. She was in good health on the evening of the day named, and went out to get some bread and tea. When she was returning she met with " this 'ere customer." Hip father and mother always "harboured this 'ere about witolies," and would frequently say, " They are at the boy again ; they woent let him alone." By that they meant that the witches were at the prisoner. There was nothing in it.— lu crose.examitiation, witness said that the pritioner was always a curious sort of hand in the village. He always wanted mere money for his work than other people, and yet he was not a skilful hand. Hs was not considered to be quite right by the farmers. Witness had heard that prisoner had been injured iu his head, but could not say whether it was true. He was a man who would drink any quantity of gin or liquor that could he pat before lion, and then he would go mad after. Prisoner never told him that his inside was full of witches, and that they were killing him. Johu Evens, a boy of fifteen, said on the evening of the date named he and another boy were walking with the prisoner from a field in which he had been woikiug that day. Prisoner had a fork and • bottle in his hand. As they were walking " to and fru " they met the deceased. Prisoner stuck the fork into her legs three timer. He told witness that there were many witches in Long Compton, and lie would kill two of them, Betsy Ford and Betsy Hughes.—Crisoi-examined, the witness said the fork was the one the prieinier had been at work with that day. He was looked upon by the boys of the village ire a" port of witch nom."—To the Judge : I go to school. I don't believe iu witchcraft. James Taylor, fanner, at Long Compton, stated that while he was in his orchard he heard a cry in the road, " Oh, dear ! Oh, dear ! Oh dear, Oh !" Witness went into-the road, and saw the prisoner knock the poor old lady down with a fork. Witness rescued the deceased. Prisoner said there were fifteen or sixteen witches iu the village, and he had killed one of them. He had known the prisoner for • long time. He was a man who knew how to take work by the piece, and also how to do it.— Mr. Langdale : As a general farm labourer, and as an ordinary man, what .lo you say of him 1— Witness : Well, I think lie was rather strange eoluetinies, he was a man who knew how to take a job, and how to do it. He was rather strange about " familiar spirits." He said they had been haunting him for three hours that day.—Mr. Bustard : He was looked upon as • strange man in the village I—Not particularly so. When be had beer he was wild and excitable. He told me that the witches were working inside him. I was told that he had been to consult a " wise man" at Coughten.—Mr. Buotard : Did not the village people look upon him as a wild sort of man I—Witness: No, he was as right as you or use when he had no beer (laughter).—Mr. Bustard : Well, I must say, I must decline the test for myself (renewed laughter).—Witness said lie believed there was one-third of the people in the village who believed in withcraft. He did not believe in it himself.—The Judge : I should think you need not deny anything so utterly abeurd.—Witnese (to the Judge): There were many persons in the village whom he knew to be popularly regarded as witches. They were all old women, and mostly widows. He did not know an instance of a young woman or • sick old woman being suspected of being a witch. Elizabeth Hughes, • deceutly-dressed woman, was next sworn. As soon as she appeared the prisoner became excited, and called out "There is another witch there.' One of the warden , here stopped hiin, but the Judge interfered and wished him to go on. The prisoner, however, made no further remark, but kept his eyes fixed on the witness fur several minutes. The witness went on to say that the deceased was her mother, and that the affair took place in the road a short dietetics from her residence. Hearing a scream she went into the road, anti found her neither lying un the ground bleeding. Mr. Taylor was standing by, holding the prisoner, who exclaimed " I have done it ; I have done it. I meant to do it. There are several more I will serve the same." Her mother died shortly after. To Mr. Buszaril—l have heard him talk about witches, but I never took any notice of him, be was*" full of wickedness. I have heard him say the witches were tormenting him. He said to me once that I had better keep from the old women, else they would make me • witch as bail as themselves. I told him I did not believe such nonsense. P.C. Simpson, who arrived on the spot immediately after the deceased had been stabbed, took the prisoner into custody. He said " I must take you to the lockup, and I am afraid you have killed that old woman." Prisoner said " les no odds about it. I hope she is dead. There's a lot inure I shall serve the same. There is fourteen or fifteen more." Be said that they had kept him for three hours in the beaus that day. Witness considered that be was under the influence of drink, as on his way to the station prisoner looked up twice and said " Who are you Are you a policeman 1 " In cuss-examination witness said—l feel sore there are many people in Long Compton who believe in witchcraft. The prisoner was weirdly a quiet end of man. Many of the people in the village who believed iu witchcraft attended places of worship. I cannot say that the prisoner attended any place of worship, but I know his fattier and mother do. Supt. Thompson, of Shipston, said that while the pthemer was in his custody he told hint Mrs. Tennant was dead, and the charge was one of murder. He said " Dead 1" Witness replied "Yee." Prisoner said " Well, I did not kill her outright." Witness told him to be careful, as what he said would be given iu evidence against hint. Prisoner replied "Then we will not have anything the matter." The next morning prisoner said he should like witness to see the water in the jug, where lie could see the witches if be was bewitched. To Mr. Bustard—He ilid not appear to realise his position, nor to he conscious that be hail done wrong. Mr. Hutchinson, surgeon at Loug Compton, proved that death resulted from several varicose veins having been punctured, causing great lees of blood and shock to the system. Had kuuwu the prisoner for many years. His runnier was peculiar, but his conversation rational. To Mr. Dugdale—l attribute his peculiarity to (trainees. He was sane enough on every subject I ever conversed with him upon. This tainclutleil the Cale fur the Crown, and Mr. Bustard called the following witnesses, previous to making I his speech. Mr. J. Mills Anderson, governor of the County Gaol, rid he had had frequent opportunities of observing the prisoner since he had been in the prison. His general conduct was that of a very eccentric man, but tie was pretty shrewd on some subjects. He knew what he had done, but he justified his act by pointing to several pas. sages in the Bible relative to the subject of witches. Ou one occasion witness saw him in his cell, when be said that he could convince him of the truth of witchcraft if he had an opportunity of doing so. Witness replied " Very well ; what do you want " Prisoner said if he were supplied with a jug and a small file, and witness would see him in the morning, then be would prove that he was bewitched. Witness supplied him with these things, anti saw him in the morning. The prisoner then held up a small glass bottle of water, half full, and, pointiug to an air bubble which was floating on the surface of the water, said that was proof that he was bewitched. Witness understood prisoner to say that be had been anti consulted a "wise man" on this subject, and he had told him that he was possessed. Prisoner said that the deceased had met her eyes upon Lim, and it was only necessary for her to do that in order to bewitch him if she was wicked enough. Witches had power to possess people in that wry. He said that he had never been well since the deceased had set her eyes upon him, and never been able to do a good day's work. He said it was hie duty to kill the woman. He did not seem to regard what he had dune required justification. At one time he said he should Dot have done it if he had not been in beer. He was aware that he stood in some peril, because a few days ago he offered to give witness a sovereign to get him off. To Mr. ilingird—The paesages in the Scriptures to which he referred for justification were the 9th chapter of the Ac's of the Apostles, and the 9th to the 11th verses; tile sth chapter of Micah, 12th and 13. h verses; and the 27 , 11 verse of the :filth chapter of Leviticus. In accordance with a suggestion made by the Judge, a Bible woe procured and the following read :—"A ntan, alio, or woman that bath a familiar print, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death ; they shall stone them with stone; their blood shall be upon them."— Leviticus xx., and 27th verse. The Judge—Did be seem to consider there were. passages in the Bible which warranted anybody in doing what he had done? Witness—That was my impression. Dr. Parry, superintendent of the c..ty Lunatic Asylum, mid ha had had two interviews with the prisoner. He wee a man of generally feeble character and badly developed bead, which, in corjunction with congenital deafness and impediment of speech, marked him as a man of very weak intellect. He VIA a childish interest in the most trifling matters, and was most demonstrative. He was labouring under a strong deli*. Dion on the subject of witchcraft, and had suited the subject to his own case with such intensity of purpose that he was not responsible for what he did in connection with that subject. Witness did not give a certificate for his removal to the lunatic asylum because he had not been tried, and it he once entered a lunatic asylum the case was so confirmed he would never come out again. Wituess, therefore, thought it was best he should take his trial first. Mr. Munn, surgeon at the County Gaol, confirmed the evidence of the previous witnesses. The jury acquitted the prisoner on the ground of insanity, and he was ordered to be kept le custody during her Majesty's pleasure.