# The Carrick Witch

As with the tragedy surrounding the death of Bridget Cleary, also reported from Clonmel almost thirty years later, the headline writers describing the case against Mary Doheny in 1864 were also quick to label this story as a case of "witchcraft".

In the case of Bridget Cleary, it was fairy superstition, and more specifically, the idea of fairy *changelings*, that was invoked to justify the behaviour of the defendants. For Mary Doheney, "the Carrick witch", it was a fairy superstition regarding the ghosts of the dead walking once again, escorted on their journey back to life by the "gentry" or "good people", that seems to explain the behaviour of the chief witnesses against the accused. As with the Cleary case, the tale was presented as an example of the prevalence of ancient superstition amongst the Irish peasantry. The case was received in court, in part at least, with mocking laughter. But many commentators would also seek to situate the affair as little different to the widespread popular interest in spiritualism that was prevalent at the time.

Here's the gist of the tale (the telling is still a little bit away from me yet...)

> It is the way of the world that death is known to every family. And for Mary Reeves, that included the death of her father, her three sisters and one of her sons. Her daughter was a sickly child, wakeful in the night, and plagued by fits during the day. But when another Mary, Mary Doheny, a "cunning woman" of the area, well known for her love potions and, as a cow doctress, her charms for restarting the milk supply in a dried up cow, she brought with her some hope of respite for the child, if nothing else. A mixture of herbs with new milk to help the child sleep, for example; and though she could do little more, Mary Doheny continued to call round, listening to stories Mary Reeves would tell of her dear father. And in response, Mary Doheny began her tale... "I've seen him, you know... he is walking again...making the journey back here, back to you..." Mary Reeves could scarcely believe her ears; her father had died several years since, her husband had helped carry him out of the house, Mary herself had seen him buried.
> Mary Doheny continued to >??? other family members, letters. "Does he, will he, does he need anything, do you think? Does he need food? Drink?" "Do you need to eat, do you need to drink?" said Mary D. "I could take him something, if you have it." And so it was, each day Mary would find something for her dear departed father, her son, her sisters. Some bread, a little butter, some potatoes, some tea. One time the potatoes  — new potatoes at that — came back uneaten. Another time, her son returned the eggs. Another, the tea was returned, to be replace by  some *new* tea, some *fresher* tea.
> Mary's husband was also convinced, even as a member of the local constabulary. The evidence was, after all, incontrovertible. ...
> But one of Sub-constable Reeves' colleagues was a little more suspicious. He'd been noticing over the last few weeks how .. And other people started to notice; like ??...
