# In Search of the Carrick Witch

The trail begins in the newspaper archives with reports of a case taken to the local magistrates in Carrick-on-Suir, in County Tipperary, Ireland, half-way along the road from Clonmel to Waterford, in sight of Slievenamon:

```{admonition} A Witch — Marvellous Revelation, September, 1864
:class: dropdown

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000425/18640909/036/0003
Cork Examiner - Friday 09 September 1864

A WITCH—MARVELLOUS REVELATION! Carrick-on-Suir, Saturday.— If Mrs. Mary Doheny lived in the "merrie olden times," she would just now be in imminent danger of having her body constituted materials for an *auto-da-fe*. Her achievements in the "black art" have been the theme of horror and wonderment amongst the good folk of Carrick-on-Suir, and a magisterial investigation has but tended to add fuel to the flame of consternation which the announcement of her powers had given existence to. For years past she has lived in affluent circumstances by selling love potions to romantic and foolish girls, while she occasionally netted respectable sums amongst farmers' wives with whom things were not going altogether smoothly. But she surpassed herself when she succeeded in enrolling two steady members of the constabulary force on the list of her votaries, and enmeshing, one of them at least, in debt to a considerable amount in supplying her extraordinary demands upon him. Sub-Constable Joseph Reeves has outlived the first buddings of youthful enthusiasm; he is a married man, of some five and forty years of age, and the father of a family. Some time ago his eldest daughter became ill, and hearing of the curative powers of Mrs. Doheny, his wife engaged ber services and the child improved somewhat. Henceforward, Mrs. Doheny became a frequent guest at the tea-table of the constable, and time she predicted that ere long he would be in affluent circumstances, inasmuch as some of his relatives and connections who had been dead for years had come to life, and would soon be permitted to show themselves upon the earth. He was also led to believe that Sir James Power, who died some ten years ago, took a deep interest in his well-being, and purposed giving him some landed property, and the result was that a correspondence was carried on between them, and the constable received no less than twenty-five letters and a gold ring from the occupant of the grave, the missives in question being regularly forwarded by Mrs. Doheny, and the replies occasionally came through her, and were sometimes found in an old moat on the hiil-side. To attest her powers still further, she made an assignation with the constable to meet him in a certain field at a particular hour, and there she revealed to him the person of his father-in-law, William Mullins, standing at a few yards' distance, dressed in a blue coat with brass buttons, a knee breeches, coarse stockings and shoes; he was not allowed to address the vision, which was beheld by his son, a boy about nine years of age, at the same time. She also showed him others of his friends, &c., who had been dead; amongst others, his son William, who departed this life some five or six years ago. This the constable deposed to on oath before the magistrates on Saturday, and as regarded her power in this respect, he was corroborated on oath by his wife. Mr. Hanna, who, with Messrs. Jephson and Wilson, presided, asked him if he had been drinking at the time, and the man replied that he had not tasted spirituous liquors for the past twenty-two years. This appears strange, to be sure, but then there is further testimony. Sub-constable Hayes is brought forward, and he deposes on oath that the woman has brought up before him several of his friends and connections who had been dead for years, and in this statement he is also corroborated by his wife. For weeks after, Mrs. Doheny is supplied with meal, for the sustenance of the potatoes, tea, &c. &c., for the sustenance of the dead who have come to life, and on more than one occasion, some tobacco was sent to old Mullens, who, it appears, was in his lifetime a great smoker. To meet these demands Constable Reeves got into debt, but the promise of gold and landed property induced him to resort to extensive credits to furnish supplies. New potatoes were at one time returned to him, with a request from the dead that they should be exchanged for old, and on one occasion some eggs were sent back with word that they had not agreed with the dead son William. Mr. Heard, the energetic and most intelligent sub-inspector, at length got intelligence of what was going on, and he determined to make inquiries in reference thereto; Reeves was removed to Clonmel in consequence of the debts he had contracted, and learning the cause thereof, he proceeded to Mrs. Doheny's house, where he found the letters (twenty five), from Sir James Power, which she had when the thing got noised abroad. He also got three bottles containing tea, cream, and milk, made up in a clean white handkerchief, and which Mrs. Doheny acknowledged were to have been forwarded to some of her defunct clients on the same evening. The house was otherwise comfortably furnished, and the dame appeared to live well on the credulity of the people. She was, of course, arrested, and the present proceedings were instituted. It was a strange thing to witness in a public court of justice—a number of intelligent people apparently in their senses deposing to such things on oath in the presene of magistrates. Whatever spell she may have wrought, there is no question of doubt but that the policemen named and their families still place implicit faith in her, for when being removed to the dock, Reeves shook her by the hand, and asserted such, and in reply to one of the magistrates, said, "Sir, if you had seen as much as I have you would be of the same opinion." After taking down in writing Reeves' evidence, and he having signed same, the magistrates were about to adjourn when Mr. Wilson, addressing Doheny, said, "Have you anything to say, now that you have heard this statement?" The woman coolly replied, "He wanted te see his dead relatives, and, dead or alive, or on horseback, I showed them to him. Mr. Heard had the woman's husband —a blind (?) man—arrested on Friday evening. He travels through the country led along by a "dark" guide, and on heing questioned he acknowledged that his worst day's receipts for some time past was 2s. 9 1/2d., while occasionally they realized six or seven shilllngs in a day. We learned that some time ago the female prisoner gave a neighbouring woman an awful beating, and yet nobody could be got to prosecute her, fearing that she might bewitch themselves or their children. So stand the and the case at present, Mrs. Doheny is remanded, and the investigation stands adjourned until Monday. The prisoner is apparently about 40 years of age, with a good-looking face, though somewhat *passe*, and a mouth particularly expressive of cunning and intelligence.

On yesterday the magistrates decided upon having a full investigation of the charges preferred against Mrs. Doheny at the petty sessions on Thursday. Mr. Heard, S.I., has unravelled some of the dame's mysteries since Saturday, and has found out the *dead* letter office. *Tipperary Free Press.*
```

```{admonition} A Strange Case of Witchery in Tipperary, September, 1864
:class: dropdown

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000998/18640910/038/0003
Newry Telegraph - Saturday 10 September 1864

Originally in  https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003179/18640907/027/0003 Clonmel Chronicle - Wednesday 07 September 1864, under the title *REMARKABLE CASE OF HALLUCINATION IN TIPPERARY.*

Also in [*Freeman's Journal* - Friday 09 September 1864](https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000056/18640909/018/0004), [*Leinster Reporter* - Wednesday 14 September 1864](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002969/18640914/034/0004),  [*Catholic Telegraph* - Saturday 17 September 1864](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000821/18640917/040/0003), etc.

Also substantially in  https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000435/18640910/106/0004 Dublin Evening Post - Saturday 10 September 1864 (*Case of Witchcraft (from our own correspondent)*), cited as being from *Clonmel Chronicle*

A STRANGE CASE OF WITCHERY IN TIPPERARY.

It would appear from recent revelations in Carrick-on-Suir that witchery has not been exorcised there. A remarkable case of its power to unseat rationality has just been brought under the judicial cognisance of the local magistracy, through the energy of Mr. Heard, S.I, and the police. No fewer than seven individuals, two of them members of the Constabulary force of the conntry—are found to be completely subject to the "black art." But we cannot wonder that even the matter-of fact community of our Irish police are not proof against the power of a village enchantress, when modern revelations have shown that no circle has been found too distinguished—no society too learned or too literary— to be drawn within the *spiritual* influence of the world-renowned home, or of the possessor of the famous "Crystal Bull," even in the heart of London, and in this the nineteenth century. Some fourteen months ago, a woman named Mary Doheny, the wife of a blind man, appeared in the town of Carrick-on-Suir, professing to be able to reveal to the living the forms of those supposed to be long ago dead, and among her dupes were two policemen, who, strange to say, implicitly believed in her power, and scrupulously obeyed her behests, It is stated that she has "drugged" her victims, but, be this as it may, they are now entirely under her influence, and have been so completely so, that she had but to command the most ridiculous services, for obedience to follow. The sub-inspector deemed it necessary, from what transpired, to place the woman under arrest, and to obtain the sworn informations of her constabulary dupes. One man, Hayes, a sub-constable, resigned, being convinced, it is stated, that he is shortly to come in for an extensive estate in the neighborhood of Carrick. The other policeman, Reeves, is a married man, and lived with his wife and family out of barracks. These were the partics who, through the activity of Mr. Heard, and we should also mention of Constable Prendergast, were brought before the resident magistrate, Mr. Hanna, Mr. Briscoe, J.P., Mr. Jephson, J.P., and Mr. Wilson, J.P., to detail what they knew of the case. As there was, on Thursday last, but a preliminary examination, we will not enter ctupon any lengthened detail of the three hours' investigation which then took place, but will merely give a general outline of what transpired upon oath, The woman Doheny obtained admission into Reeves's family circle nearly twelve months ago, under the pretence that she could cure a little child who was then dying. She gave it herbs; but despite her skill, the little one died, and, strange to say, from that moment, such was the confidence she had won, she lived almost constantly at Reeves's house, ing, drinking, and "bewitching" poor Mrs. Reeves, until the latter, who before had been a fine handsome looking woman, grew pale and emaciated, with peculiarly lustrous but sunken eyes, plainly indicating the infatuation she was under, and in which her husband also shared. It would seem that Mrs. Reeves's father, Wm. Mullins, was buried some years ago, and at a later period, another relative, nemed Tom Sheelham, of Mothill, also died; and Mary Doheny asked her would she wish to see those persons and her own child. Mrs. Reeves said she would, and, accordingly, about two months ago, the old woman brought her and her husband to an unoccupied house near the railway bridge, and at twelve o'clock at night— this they have actually sworn — showed them the three persons *alive*, whom they supposed to be dead. Ever since, with extreme regularity, Reeves and his wife have prepared food, and sent their niece with it to Mrs. Doheny, for the use of their relatives and child who had "come to life." To show the extremity of this infatuation, we will give an extract from the sworn testimony of one of the principal witnesses against the prisoner Doheny, whom the crown is prosecuting:—

Mr. Hanna (to Mrs. Reeves)— What is your name? Mullins is my maiden name, but Reeves by marriage.

Is your father dead? He died about three years ago, and was buried in Carrick-on-Suir, but he is now living in Carrick-on-Suir!

Living! How can you say that? Because I saw him!

Under what circumstances? I had a whisper from him; his voice was heard by night, and afterwards Mrs. Doheny (the prisoner) brought me and showed him to me. She also showed me Tom Sheehan, who was lame, and my own child. They were all alive (sensation in court). I sent them food regularly, and upon one occasion I sent my father my chemise to serve as a shirt for him! (This witness gave her evidence in a clear, collected, and positive manner).

Constable Reeves, a man of about forty-five years of age, was next called, and he swore that he, too, saw the two persons and his little daughter, whom he believed to be dead. There was no doubt whatever upon his mind; there they were where the prisoner pointed them out, and, more than this, she had brought him to a field near the moat of Ballydine, and showed him William Mullins, with whom he had been well acquainted!

The niece was called — a fine intelligent girl she appeared to be — and in a clear voice and unhesitatingly she answered the questions put to her by the magistrates. Having been sworn, she said that every night after dark, she brought tea, milk, bread, and butter and other food, and gave them to her uncle, Tom Sheehan, who she always saw standing under the wall of the old house. The magistrates interrogated her closely, but she persisted in swearing that it was to Tom Sheehan and no one else she gave the food.

Hayes, the retired policeman, came forward, and as positively deposed on oath that he knew some of his own relatives brought to life. Prisoner showed Mullins to him. He believed in ghosts, "For," said he, "I saw one in the County Cork, standing outside the door where a cousin of mine was 'waking.' It is not so extraordinary," he added, "for persons to be raised from the dead."

It is marvellous that in this enlightened age a scene such as we are describing could he found to occur in a court of justice. The magistrates and a crowded audience were positively astounded, and from the remarks which were heard to proceed from several persons—some well dressed and apparently in comfortable circumstances in life—and also from the awe which was written upon the countenances of a still greater number, it appears that many beside the "bewitched" family believe in the supernatural power of the prisoner—this modern Witch of Endor! Mr. Heard, we should have mentioned, brought into court the prisoner's box, found in her house, and it contained three bags filled with letters. Some of these she said she had received from the other world, and her father (who never could write), and some from Captain James Power, of Ballydine, who died some years ago; Captain Power she believed to be really dead. Those letters promised her husband money and a large quantity of land. One of them, from Captain Power, contained a *gold* ring (produced in court). Those letters were sent to Mrs. Doheny, according to arrangement, after being read! This accounts for their being found in the prisoner's box. The prisoner was remanded until to-morrow, when the case will, it is expected, be finally heard so far as the magistrates are concerned. Before the old woman left the dock to be conducted back to prison Constable Reeves advanced towards her and, grasping her by the hand, said, "Never mind, Mary, no matter what they say, I believe what you told me and what I have seen."

Mr Heard, anxious to sift this case to the utmost, with a view to obtain, if possible, evidence sufficient to bring the prisoner to trial—for witchcraft cannot now-a-days be summarily disposed of — is exerting all his ingenuity to secure fresh evidence for the adjourned investigation to-morrow, and some very material facts he has since elicited. It is stated that a very respectable and wealthy farmer, the wife of a shopkeeper, and a milk-woman, are among the infatuated. This case has naturally excited extraordinary interest, and a densely crowded court is expected on Thursday. The most remarkabie part of the story remains to he added. This Constable Reeves may now be seen in the streets of Clonmel — whither he has been transferred‚ walking about with his baton under his arm as one of the preservers of the public peace!!

Reeves, we should observe, is upon every way, except this strange hallucination excedingly collected and sensible, but here reason seems quite unseated. The woman Doheny made up draughts for himself and family, and certainly, since partaking of those potations, they have become more and more infatuated.

We have just received copies of the sworn informations in this extraordinary case. The evidence seems to be sufficiently complete to warrant the committal of the prisoner for trial, and we learn that still further disclosures have been brought to light, through the energy of the constabulary. Mrs. Doheny is also a cow doctress, and during the dry Summer reaped quite a golden harvest of "consolation fees" for miles around. The farmers came, it is said, to her for herbs and charms, to bring back a full supply of milk to their stock. One dairywomen gave her it is asserted, no less than £5, and this liberality she thinks was the means of bringing the rain. This woman, says our correspondent, has duped so many persons, that the Rev. Mr. Power, C.C., convened a of the rnral population, against allowing strangers into their houses or families:

2d September, 1864—Mary Reeves sworn—1864. The defendant, Mrs. Doheny, attended my child when it was sick. She made up bottles for it. The child was not getting better. My father died some years ago—three years ago — and was buried in Rathcormack. His name was William Mullins, of Ross, County Wexford. I saw him in my house in Carrick-on-Suir about two months ago, at about twelve at night. A few nights before that he spoke to me, and said he would return home to me and let me know more. After he appeared to me I sent him a shirt by the defendant, Mrs. Doheny. I also sent hima pair of stockings and food, bread and tea, about forty times. I sent all the things to my father by defendant, Mrs. Doheny. My husband was not present when I sent those things. I told him I had done so. I sent tea and new milk boiled to my father, my child, and my other sisters, who are now all in life in human form. Mary Doheny told me that my sisters and child are alive. About four months ago she told me so. My husband was present and heard her. She also said that when they came they would bring their living with them—that they would bring gold, and that they would have a quantity of land—Dr. Purcell's William Power's, and a great many other poople's. (Signed) MARY REEVES

Mrs. Reeves re-examined—The shirt I sent to my father was made of a night dress of my own. It was my own night dress we altered. It was pierced on the elbow. It had a collar and edging. it myself. My mother spun and knitted the stockings herself. They were long stockings, and woollen; grey woolled. My father sent me the letters now produced, and I gave them to defendant to give back to my father.

2d September, Anastatia Power sworn —I am niece to Mrs. Reeves. She sent me last night, the 1st September, 1864, to a house near the corner of the Green, Carrick-on-Suir, to her father, William Mullins, with bread, butter, and tea. I gave those things to Tom Sheehan. On the night before that I also brought provisions, and gave them to Tom Sheehan at the same place.

James Hayes—Mrs. Doheny pointed out to me Tom Sheehan—who I heard died some years ago— some night last week, leaning on a wall at Duggan's field. I saw Mrs. Mullin and Terence Reeves, as known to me by description given me by Mrs. Reeves. Mrs. Doheny told me the family of Reeves would get property. Defendant told me that I would get land. I heard that William Mullins and Terence Reeves died, and I do believe that I have seen those persons since they died, but I can't say whether they were dead or alive when I did see them. I have seen the ghost of my cousin Crowly many years ago.

3rd September, 1864.—Joseph Reeves—I first became acquainted with the defendant twelve months ago, when she attended my child. She rendered the child great benefit. My father-in-law, William Mullins, died in my house in Carrick-on-Suir last May three years. About three months ago defendant told me to go with her, and that she would show me my father-in-law. I went with her to Green-hill, near Mr. Pierce Power's place. In Michael Gaul's grass field I saw my father-in-law standing in the field. He was within twenty yards of me. I did not speak. I am not sure whether defendant prevented me or not. My son Wm., aged about seven years, died on the 13th April, 1860. About two months ago defendant told me to go to William Duggan's waste house and that I would see him. I did go, with my son Terence, eight years of age. I saw my child William, who died and was buried, standing inside the window. Margaret Power was standing with the child William. She was my sister-in-law, and died about seven years ago. I did not speak to either of them. Mrs. Doheny, the defendant, told me I would see them on a certain night she named. My wife sent bread, butter, tea, meat, and a few potatoes to her father, son, and sister. She gave them into defendant's hands with my consent and approval. Defendant asked my wife to send food. She asked in my presence for the food, and as it was after I had seen William Mullins I consented. It was also after I had seen the son and sister-in-law alive. I received letters from defendant's hand. She said Captain James Power, of Ballydine, wrote the letters, telling me that I would get money and land. Captain James Power died about eight or nine years ago. My belief is that the letters were written in the other world. Defendant told me she got the letters from Captain Power. On one occasion defendant told me to write to Captain Power and send the letter to the moat in Ballydine. I did write, and sent the letter by my child, Terence, and got the answer back. Defendant promised me within the last three months that I would get land in the County Waterford. She said that I should get money. Defendant told me when my relations returned that they would bring gold. Defendant brought me a gold ring from some one that had died. A letter from Captain Power directed me to keep the ring and say nothing about it. Defendant brought back some potatoes, and said that the dead would not use them and to send more, and others were sent. She got tobacco for William Mullins to smoke. I went with my son Terence to within a hundred yards of the moat in Ballydine (four miles from Carrick-on-Suir). Defendant was with us. She told me to stop, and she and my son went forward to the moat, and some time after she called me. The son then told me he had a letter for me, and we returned home. When we came home my son gave me the letter. I have been sending food every day to those that died for about the last six weeks. On several occasions defendant brought back the food and said they did not like it. On one occasion she said the eggs were bad and that my son William would not use them as they took an effect on him. A shirt, trousers, and stockings were sent to my son. I saw my wife giving the trousers to defendant.  
(Signed) Joseph REEVES.  
A.W. H. Heard, complainant; Mary Doheny, defendant.  
Petty Sessions, Carrick-on-Suir, Co. Tipperary, S.R.

The informations of Ellen Walsh, who saith on her oath that a woman, who I believed to be Mary Doheny, came to my lodgings in Grantown Street, in Carrick-on-Suir, several times, and asked me to write letters for her. I wrote letters often for about the last four months for her. The letters now produced, I wrote for the said Mary Doheny, writing down the words she told me. She asked me to change my handwriting—to write like a man. She paid me 3d for each letter; lately she paid me 4d, and 2d for the small ones. She refused to tell me who the messages were from, or to whom they were going. And the said informant binds herself to attend at Carrick-on-Suir Petty Sessions on the 8th Sept., 1864, to prosecute the said Mary Doheny for the said offence, or otherwise to forfeit to the crown the sum of ...  
(Signed) Ellen Walsh.

Taken before me the 4th day of Sept., 1864, at Carrick-on-Suir, in said court.  
(Signed) S. Hanna, Justice of said County. —*Clonmel Chronicle.*
```

In response to the mocking tone of many of the reports that were starting to, and would continue to, appear in the Britih press, the following editorial sought to humanise the situation that the Reeves' found themselves in, as well as the distress suffered by them. It also pointed out that belief in spiritualistic practices was rife not just in London, but also in the better part of society there. Perhaps most pointedly, the author also suggested that Mary would have a hard time living down the reputation that had attached itself to her. As we shall see, the author's future gazing in this regard could not have been more accurate.

```{admonition} "We doubt that she will ever be the better of her bewitchment", September 1864
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002969/18640914/034/0003
Leinster Reporter - Wednesday 14 September 1864

The stigma that the present age is one of cold and unbelieving materialism, of hard and doubting scepticism is one that we cannot longer hold as applying with force and truth. Human nature is the same in the nineteenth as in the seventeenth century. Education has not chased away all the bugbears that used to torment the infancy of the world's intellect. Superstition still hangs a gloomy light on the very entrance of our temples and encourages the phantasies that we would look upon as a specialite of the Middle Ages. If in higher circles this feeling takes the sounding name of spiritualism and takes the senses of Imperial rulers captive we see no difference. The feelings which prompted the English boors to half drown an unfortunate wretch whom they suspected of witchcraft, and that which opened palace gates to Mr Home are identical. Men have an unconquered love of the wonderful and an unsatisfied yearning after the mysterious, and it is not to be wondered at that they often find "their eyes made the fools of the other senses." The notions exemplified by Mr Home and enunciated of late by Bulwer Lytton find a more homely phase in the wonders of Mary Doheny. And of all the witches from the Witch of Endor down commend us to Mrs Mary Doheny. She disdains any accessory of crystal balls or magic sceptres— no abracadabras or muttered charm for her—her word *pue et simple* is sufficient to call "spirits from the "vasty deep" or where ever else they abide. If Constable Reeves had wished like Saul to have any conversation with his defunct friends doubtless Mrs Doheny would have been only too happy to have gratified him. But he saw them in the open day light. We cannot call to mind any manifestation of "spiritual" power at all to equal this. We are used to a preliminary ritual of darkened rooms, burning incense and other means of fixing the attention and heightening the nervous excitement, before the object is exposed for the view of the duped and bewildered. But Mrs Doheny points with her finger, and lo, the dead man appears as he looked when alive, and so satisfied are the deceived that he has come back that they have daily sent him food and even clothes and tobacco. Astonishment at such credulity must be the first feeling that takes possession of the mind of any one who reads the "strange story" on our fourth page of this day. The more wonderful from the fact that two policemen even after having the evidence that was adduced still persist in their belief of the extraordinary manifestation they have beheld, and openly avow their faith in the promises of this wretched woman. We should say that the soooner the police force is rid of the services of Constable Reeves the better. We wonder can any old woman who may come under his observation persuade him about dead relatives and "crocks o' goold." If so the vagrants of that district must find friends where they should have expected enemies. It may be, however, that the enchanting influence is confined to the famous Mary Doheney, in which case, perhaps the public need not much care that one or two policemen have been placed under a "spell," and have been compelled to furnish food to their deceased relatives. But it is a question affecting the moral condition of the people that such proceedings should not be allowed, and the description given of the wife of Reeves is sufficient to show the baleful effect of this superstition. Tortured by voices and visions and nervously sensitive to every passing feeling she has evidently reached that morbid state in which the mind feeds upon the body, burning the vessel that contains it. We doubt that she will ever be the better of her bewitchment. The fine healthy woman transformed to the hectic shrinking demented imbecile that has given her intelligence to the keeping of a crafty and designing woman who has well worked the resources thus placed at her command. We have no doubt that a great many more will be found to have been bewitched, and if her proceedings had not been arrested she was likely to realise a "crock of goold" out of the silly and superstitious feelings of the country people. She can console herself with the reflection that she has been eminently successful in the line which she has marked out for herself, and if the income was not commensurate it surely must be from the inability of her victims to pay, and not from any scruple of hers as to the sordid dross. The superstition of the Virgin's post office elaborated by the priests of Santiago, with such dreadful results, had evidently reached the ears of Mary Doheny, and forthwith the moat of Ballydine becomes a *dead* letter office. We shall not dwell any longer on this most disreputable business, for which we cannot but blush for the ignorance and superstition of our countrymen and deprecate the adverse criticism of our English contemporaries, who, notwithstanding recent revelations in the centre of London, are sure to declaim on the besotted ignorance of poor Paddy, and to lecture the people and their instructors, as if their own hands were clean in this matter, as if they had no necessity in pulling the beam out of their own eye.

```

A letter to the editor of *Freeman's Journal*, which had been one of the many publications running the "Strange Case of Witchery in Tipperary" story the previous week ([Friday 09 September 1864](https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000056/18640909/018/0004)) also TO DO ??

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000056/18640914/014/0003
Freeman's Journal - Wednesday 14 September 1864

SOMETHING ABOUT FAIRIES. TO THE EDITOR OF THE FREEMAN. Sir—In your issue of the 9th inst. I read an article entitled, "*A strange cae of witchery in Tipperary*,"` in which a belief in the mortal existence of parties who apparently departed this life is circumstantially detailed. This is, indeed, a strange case of superstition, firmly believed in by parties in the nineteenth century who should have known better. But no person acquainted wilh the nature of the agency, through which such wicked superstitlons have been propagated since the establishment of Christianity and the downfall of Druidism in Ireland, will feel at all surprised. Lest this superstition, wicked, indeed, as it is, should be attributed to any piinciple of Christianity by persons unacquainted with its origin and nature, I will endeavour, briefly as poasible, to show both. Though it does not appear that the magistrates, before whom the case was tried at Carrick-on-Suir, understood that the persons who died were supposed to have been spirited by fairies, yet the nature of the evidence is clear enough on that point. The impression on the minds of their friends appears to be that they had been "spirited" away, and subsbtitutes left instead, and, therefore, that they did not really die. And there is another superstition attached to this—namely, that if a person thus carried away partook of either food or drink in "fairydom" he should never have power to escape from the elfine thraldom in which he was held. This is the reason that caueed Mrs. Reeves to send sustenance to her relatives. The notion in the existence of fairies, or wandering demons, is very ancient, perhaps coeval with the dispersion at Babylon. It was not confined to Ireland and the Britilh Isles, for we find it prevalent in Persis, Egypt, Hindustan, and almost all oriental countries where the doctrines of the Magi had held sway. It was known to the ancient Greeks and Romans, and prevalls to a considerable extent among the Bretons of the present day. It, in fact, existed in every country where the ancient Celts formed settlements or sojourned in course of their transit to the west, and several tribes of the aboriginal races of the American Continent, we are informed, held similar doctrines. It is curious to examine the analogy subsisting between the origin attributed by ancient Greek mythologists and the Irish to fairies. The Titans who made war upon the gods ate the representatives of our rebel angels in Greek and Roman mythology, and Hesiod informs us that those wicked disturbers of celestial felicity were transformed after death into wandering demons, and interested themselves in human affairs. Another Greek writer supports the assertion, stating that the souls of the wicked giants were dispersed over the earth as wandering demons. In an ancient Irish poem, attributed to Donough, the great Abbot of Boyle, Death is introduced as engaged in a dialogue with a dying sinner, where the fatal visitor is made to speak of the fairies thus:—

I am found on the sea as well as on land,  
I am found in the woods amongst the fairies,  
And those are not the souls of men  
Who come to an unprovided death,  
But aerial demons that madly rebel'ed,  
And committed treason against the King of Kings;  
For which crimos thousands of them were huried from heaven,  
And shal burn in hell for all eternity.

The doctrine of spiritng people into fairydon strongly savours of the metempsychosis, or transmigration of souls, which was evidently a portion of the tenets of the Druids, for the doctrine appears to have embodied with it a strong admixture of that of the Irih pagan elysium, since persons who had to all natural appearances died and were buried, really existed, as has been generally supposed, in fairy subterranean abodes under unpleasant bondage. It was supposed that some of these unfortunate persons were wont to be restored to their friends, and, no doubt, Mrs. Reeves expects that her relations shall yet be restored to the society of the living, since she has taken so much care to furnish them with food and clothing. If we resolve this demoniacal superstition into its true meaning, in accordance with the doctrine upon which it has been founded, it appears from the traditions of the people, and if we could believe what respectable persons have asserted to us, that some of those spirited persons have returned to their families, the whole would amount only to this, that such defunct individuals had again assumed the human shape, after various migrations, like Tuan Mac Coireall of Irish history. And let not the duped people imagine that their relatives in fairydomn always enjoyed their natural shape, because we find an extract in our authentic MSS. informing us that the wretched beings thus spirited away by demons were forced to assume the shape of the lower animals. The story of the Swan of Mac Coise, the poet, sufficiently illustrates this. We give the translation in the words of others:—

On a certain day that Mac Coise was at the Boyne he saw a flock cf swans, whereupon he cast a stone at them, and it struck one of the swans on the wing. He ran immediately to catch it, when he found it was a woman. He demanded intelligence from her as to what happened to her and how she came to be in that position. And she informed him. "I was in sickness," said she, "and it appeared to my friends that I died; but it was wandering spirits and demons that spirited me away with them."

And the poet restored her to her friends. Now, this is a complete case of pagan metamorphosis or transmigration of the spirit into various corporal forms, and unquestionably Mrs. Reeves believes that her friends shall one day be restored to her, under certain conditions of which we have heard a good deal in other cases, but none of which have we ever seen fulfilled. I have said so much to show that this, I am sorry to say, very prevalent notion which still prevails in this country is a remnant of Druidiem, and not at all founded on any principal of Christianity, it now remains to show by what wicked agency this abominable superstition is kept still alive.

The Druidical doctrines appear from what we can now glean of them to have been very accommodating in supplying the temporal as well as the spiritual wants of the human kind, but the Christian faith did not profess to remedy all the necessaries of human life according to order. Though the majority of the people embraced the true faith, still there were some pertinacious sticklers to paganism, who believed that the new doctrine did not come up to the material wants of the people, or at least pretended so. The bulk of the people, who could not possibly abandon all the reminiscences of the religion they had only recently abandoned, gave them a tacit toleration, especially since those wretchee pretended to be the most pious Christians in existence though a single individual of them never, it is believed, had been a Christian. For brevity's sake it may as well be said, that these pretenders to spirituality dwindled down to the cbarm-mongers and fairy-herb doctors of our own day, and, it may be added, to the wicked *boccachs*, or mendicants, who had, or pretended to have, been attended by familiar spirits, or demons, cailed by them *leaunen sighe*, that is, a fairy or familiar spirit, which enabled them to cure diseases and tell all about the world of spirits. These were the precursors of the spiritual mediums of the present day. The clergy opposed these vagabonds with all their power at all times, but they nevertheless kept hold on the poeople's affections. The writer was personally acquainted with many of these wicked charm-mongers, fairy-herb doctors, boccachs, &c., and was of the opinion they had been all scattered through the world by the famine, until the case in question has appeared. It is hoped that the few incoherent hints thrown out, respecting the origin of this gross superstition, will enlighten the public and prevent them from giving credence to such superstitions. ANTIQUITAS.

```

TH TO DO SEE ALSO - eg story of tam lin as a rescue from fairy land; also Mabinogion II. And of course, Bridget Cleary

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000821/18640917/046/0004
Catholic Telegraph - Saturday 17 September 1864

WITCHES AND WITCHERY. The strange case of witchery in Tipperary has suddenly called us back to bygone times when such delusions were of almost daily occurrence. A woman belonging to the humblest class—an ordinary empyric and imposter gains credence for the supernatural power of bringing the dead to life—of causing them to hold intercourse and correspondence with their living friends and others, of healing the sick—in short of doing various things that with rational minds are considered beyond the range of mortal capacity to compass. Nor do the individuals who have been thus thoroughly brought under the influence of the Tipperary weird-sister belong to the wholly illiterate or ignorant class. Two of them are intelligent policemen whose calling and frequent contact with vagrants, vagabonds and wrong-doers of every kind must, as a rule, render them the last people in the world likely to be duped and deluded by such palpible fallacies. However, credulity, a yearning for, and belief in, the supernatural, is as common to all ranks of men as it has been to all ages of the world. The enlightenment which is thought to pervada all grades and all localities, rushes with volant rapidity post the village and the hamlet, and the country town, without shedding a ray upon the majority of those who inhabit, and who scarcely ever leave them, to frequent the great haunts of civilisation. Every county, nay, every district, preserves its remnants of legendary traditions—its history of witches and fairies, of spirits and hobgoblins. There are thousands upon thousands, moreover, who affect to ridicule the belief in such things in others, wno yet themselves secretly place full credence in them. Nor is all this confined to any country. It is as prevalent in matter-of-fact England and canny Scotland as amongst us, or rather more so. Spiritualism hat turned the brain of numbers amongst the best educated classes in England. If the rural dame, her daughter, and her swain, place implicit reliance on the vaticinations and foreshowings of a gipsey or any other sage, such as the crafty Mrs. Doheny, for instance, your ladies and belles and beaux of high degree, will rush eagerly to some notable city charlatan to snatch a glance into futurity. Inventions, discoveries, and improvements have not so utterly separated the past from the present, as to extinguish in men's hearts and minds the craving desire for the marvellous, the poet's dreamings and the Pagan imaginings which peopled hill and dale, flood, field, fen, and forest with beings of another world—with gods and demigods, sylphs and fairies, mighty maji and powerful wizards, to whose beck and bidding mortals and immortals were alike compelled to yield obedience. How deeply all these things, these pleasingly thrilling beliefs are; how irradicable by ordinary means is seen in the fact that even so strictly religious a people as the Irish—a people who yield such thorough obedience in religious matters to their priests, still they give implicit credence to the mythological creations that were current amongst their countrymen in the days of Druid superstition, notwithstanding the ecclesiastical penalties attached to the belief in them. A writer in last Wednesday's *Freeman* who adopts the *nom de plume* of *Antiquitas* weaves an ingenious, and most probably correct connecting link between the notions current centuries ago regarding matters supernatural and those which were entertained by the victims of the incentatress `*[sic]*` Mrs. Doheny. The stringentcy ot the English law against witches, witchcraft, and the like has, in like manner, failed to eradicate the proclivity inherent in human nature, to place a certain amount of faith in both. Were it not that evil spirits and their baneful influences are supposed to predominate in all these preternatural sayings and doings, they would be far more extensively indulged in. But as it is popularly believed that, like Shylook, these gensry will eventually insist upon the whole pound of flesh named in their bond, the majority of those who would otherwise become their dupes and victims refrain from all interference with them, rather through fear of the future results than from any doubt as to the extent of their power and influence. The deterring power in Ireland is religion, but as in England and Scotland no such religious action exists, delusions such as the one in question are far more extensively practised, and, as a matter of course, succeed in obtaining a much larger number of dupes and victims.
```

TO DO

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000870/18640917/056/0002
Ulster Gazette - Saturday 17 September 1864

"THE NINETEENTH CENTURY."

The heading which hare placed to the observations which we now purpose making, forms an expression generally used to devote the high civilisation to which we have necessarily reached in a Christian Country in "the nineteenth century" of the Christian era. But who would expect in this year 1864, to find amongst us, those who placed the most implicit confidence in professed witches and witchcraft? Yet so it is. In the County Tipperary, at Carrick-on-Suir resides, or did reside until the past few days, when the Country has provided another residence, a Mrs Mary Doheny the wife of a "blind" man who, himself, made from 2e 6d to 7s a day by begging. Mrs Doheny professed to be able even to raise the dead and show them their relatives. No "witch of Endor", ever deceived King Saul more than has this May Doneny `[sic]` deceived Constables Reeves, Hayes and their families. She showed them their relatives by the half dozen, living and moving in the very clothes they wore before they departed this life. It is not recorded that "the witch of Endor" was so sucessful in this respect. And then Samuel seems to have had no notion of joining in earthly affairs again. But Mrs Doheny's restored ones all have got their appetite and can feed on the best. Indeed, some of them were rather select about the kind of potatoes and eggs which they received, and returned them as not good enough. We thought the potatoes, at least, were improved this season, but Mrs. Doheny's ghosts differ with us in this point. Now, if this Tipperary "witch" had deceived some of the ignorant peasantry we would feel much surprised at it. But that two otherwise intelligent members of the Constabulary force could be thus befooled by her is somewhat astounding.— Although the doings of this dame have been exposed in open court, and the whole laughed at heartily by the public, yet Reeves says "it's no laughing matter." He believes every title of it still. He has not the slightest doubt in Mary's powers. He rather feels offended at any one talking of his friends as if they were dead. They are all alive now. He saw them and he believes his eyes. He got letters from them, and has read these letters. What cares he for the evidence of any woman in Carrick-on-Suir, that it was she who wrote them and not the dead?—we beg pardon, the restored to life. Mrs. Reeves, too, has no doubt of the truth of all, and although the ghosts appeared dressed as before the death of the parties, yet Mrs. Reeves, like a loving daughter, sent a chimese of her own to make a shirt for her restored father. We wonder whether she expected her father could get some female ghost who is "handy with the needle" to make the chimese look a little like a shirt. Mrs. Doheny, however, goes to prison to be tried for "obtaining money under false pretences."  We question very much whether she can be committed. She does not seem have asked for any money.— If fools gave her money, food and clothing, to transmit to the dead who are alive again that was not at her request. At least no evidence has been given to show that it was, and consequently, unless more clear testimony be produced on this point we think the Carrick on-Suir witch may be acquitted. But "what an ignorant state people must be in to believe such folly," ask our readers. Do not judge too hastily. Is Constable Reeves more than these gentlemen and ladies who believe most implicitly in "Spirit Rapping" and "Table Turning"? We think he is not quite so bad. He alleges that he saw his friends. The believers in "Spirit Rapping" only hear them knocking. We don't, however, seek to excuse Reeves or his wife, but to desire to show that this belief in apparitions prevails in even higher circles, and more exalted spheres in life; and that it is time for every intelligent member of the community to thoroughly discountenance spirit rapping, media, ghost stories, witch craft, and all such folly and nonsense, for so long as the belief in these prevails amongst the upper classes, we cannot believe police constables to be above being befooled by the same. We, for our part, would just as soon believe in Mary Doheny's powers as in those of professed spiritualists who live as "ladies" and "gentlemen" and we would threat the latter to a residence in a county prison just as quickly as we would Mrs Doheny, and on a like charge.

```
