# Hedingham Witchcraft Case

TO DO

referenced in Glasgow Herald - Saturday 17 September 1864



https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000225/18630828/019/0003
Chelmsford Chronicle - Friday 28 August 1863

Hedingham Special Session, August 25. A. Majendie Esq., C. B. Sperling. L. J. Way, Eaqrs.; and Revds. W. K. Burton, and J. Foster. Martin, of Belchamp Walter, sawyer, was findeu 20s. and costs lis. for drunken and riotous conduct lit ii «tingthorpe. IVilks, Bidgwell, was fined Cd. and costs 12s. 'or careless driving tho highway,at Yeldham, the 2:lnd inßtant. A] witchcraft.—Extraordinary case. Smith, a married woman, Bidgwell, Sumu«l Stain n*r«, builder, and George Gibton, bricklayer, of Heditigham, were charged with the following extraordinary and c-uel assault upon old deaf and dumb Frenchman, who*: name is unknown, his sobriquet beiug " Dummy." —Mr Cardinall prosecuted ; Mr. Jones defeuded the male prisoners.—Mr. Cardinall, in his opening address, stated that prisoner Emma Smith alleged that she was bewitched, and believed that the old man had practised the evil art upon her, and this had led to the assault upon a defen:eless old man of seventy.—John Pettit, a shoemaker, of Sit le Hedingham, deposed Monday evening, August 3rd, was at the public-house, at Sible Hedingham there were about people in tho tap-room, am thorn wero the prisoners and old Dummy Gibson and td danced about the room, and Gibson wanted him to kiss Mrs. Smith, but did not; Mrs. Smith said she would give umy three sovereigns home with her; I afterwards saw him outside the house, sitting on tho ground Mrs. Smith caught hold him and dragged him the i towards tho brook, and thought both went into the water; I saw the old man in the brook, and Mrs. Smith was gone away; he went to the opposite side, bat Sirs. Smith pushed him back; she did this several timet, but at length he got out and sat down a heap stones; the woman struck him several times with a stick on tbe head and shoulders; I told her not to so, at she then kicked him; there was a crowd peopie stauding by; George Jenkinsou offered to see the oM man home, and Dummy went off down the lane, along the brook runt; presently I heard splash, and on the lane I saw the old man the water again ; Mrs. Smith was by the side of the brook, and tho prisoner Stammers was helpiug the old man out; Gibson was not there ; I heard a woman's voice call out, Swim him the mill- iead." —Henrietta Garrod, ten years age, stated saw Gibson and Dummy dancing in tbe Bwan ; they fell down once; he tried to make Dummy Mrs. Smith; Mrs. Smith slapped Dummy's face ; Gibtou gave him some beer about a quarter past eleven o'clock I heard a noise and -vent down to the Swan again; I saw Dummy sitting on ttone-heap, aud Mrs. Smith shoved bim into the brook; I saw Stammert thove into the water once; Mrt. Smith pushed the old man in the water several times; she asked for his stick, and presently saw her with it; she struck Dummy on the head twice, and repeatedly across tbe shoulders; she called him devil, and taid the would servo him out as he had served her then somehow he got near the water, and Mrt_ Smith shoved him in; he tried to call out murder ;" Smith took hold of his shoulders and Stammers took his feet, and they rolled him into the brook; I saw Stammerjump in and get him out; am sure he put him first they got him out and laid him the grass; Mrs. Bruty and othcrt then got him home.—Goorge Jenkinton stated: I wa* in the tap-room aud saw Gibson and Dummy dancing; Gibson taid to Mrs. Smith, "You had better up," aud wanted her to kiss Dummy ; they drank toge .her; taw Dummy come outtide and sit down by the wimiow; Mrs. Smith declared should go home with her; she threw his hat into the brook, dragged him to the and pushed him in; she shoved him back when att. to get out; got a heap of stones and laid thero time; he langhed once, but it might be defiant laugh ; he wa* then lifted up, and Stammers and went towards home; I afterwards saw Mrs. Smith try put iiim into the brook again ; saw no one else try ; Mrs. .Smith called for some one help her shove bim in ; then) was about a foot of water there; I called out that won il Vie drowned; Stammers was close by, and jumped pet the old man out; interfered prevent this treatment.—Sarah Ann Unity prov< 1 that she saw Mrs Smith striko Dummy on tho head, and drag him towards the wattr; (witness) then went indoors, but afterwards cam» out, helped him ont tho water, and went home with him to his hat.—W. V. Fowke, Esq., guardian Sibl* Hedingham (at whose instance the prosecution was instituted), described the old man's condition on the following morning, when was iv a state of collapse, and greatly upon tho head and shoulders ; his clothes, in which he had slept, were wet and muddy, and he "creamed when he was undressed ; was removed to the Halsted workhouse on the following day.—Mr. A. Megget, assistant t< D. Sinclair, Esq., medical officer of Halsted anion, stated that he examined the old man the instant at the workhouse, and found him suffering from bruises upon the tran, head, and shoulders, and from bronchitis recently contracted; was now confined hit bed, and iv very great danger, although not abtolutcly in dying circumstances.—After retiring to consult, the bench discharged the prisoner Gibson, and acceded to Mr. Cardinal!'? app ication for adjournment of the case to the next benrh-day.—The Chairman directed Mr*. Smith be retained in custody, and Stammers to find two suretiet of each and himself in £50, or to remain cojtody.—The inquiry lasted more than three hours. 

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001325/18630829/125/0005
Suffolk Chronicle - Saturday 29 August 1863

Alleged Witchcraft.—At Castle Hedingham Petty Sessions, on Tuesday, Emma Smith, a married woman, of Ridgwell, Samuel Stammers, builder, and Oeorge Gibson, bricklayer, of Sible Hedingham, were charged with the following extraordinary and cruel assault upon an old deaf and dumb Frenchman, whose name is unknown, his sobriquet being “ Dummy.”— Mr. Cardinall prosecuted, and in his opening address stated that the prisoner Emma Smith alleged that she believed that the old man bad practised the evil art upon her, and this had led to the assault upon a defenceless old man of 70.—0n Monday evening, August 3rd, the prisoners and “Dummy,” with a number of other people, were in the tap-room at the Vivian public-house at Sible Hedingbam. Gibson and “Dummy” danced about the room, and the former wanted him to kiss the woman Smith, but he would not. The prisoner Smith wanted “Dummy” to go home with her, and afterwards as the old man was sitting on a heap of stones outside, Mrs. Smith shoved him back, dragged him to a brook, and pushed him in, and also struck him with a stick. Stammers also shoved the old man into the water. “ Dummy ’’ was helped home to his but, and the next morning was examined by Mr. Megget, assistant to the medical officer of the Union, who found him suffering from bruises on the arms, head, and shoulders, and bronchitis recently contracted. He is now confined to his bed, and in very great danger, though not in dying circumstances.—Gibson was discharged, and Smith and Stammers remanded, the latter being admitted to bail.

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004236/18630904/030/0002
Essex Weekly News - Friday 04 September 1863

TO DO

CAN SUCH THLNGS RE-IN ESSEX? Most renders of newspaper literature have ooresionally seen paragraphs heeded" Witchcraft in the Nineteenth Century," and the intelligent and reflecting portion have doubtless been pained upon perusing the acoounts of superstitious pro. eeedings and revolting barlritities inflicted upon inoffensive persons by beutalierd men or women, under the belief that the victims of their enmity were in passeenion of some secret power which enabled them to inflict injeries or care calamities to overtake them. Most of us can recollect the impression made upon oar youthful minds, in our school-days, while enders to master "rudiments of English history," by the facts recorded respecting witches and sorcerers, and the tests applied to prove, as it was supposed they would, the guilt or innocence of the poor souls who had acquired this unenviable and dangerous reputation—such testa, for instance, as compelling them to walk upon hot irons, and throwing their, bound hand and foot, into rivers and dreams. If they tooted, their innocence was regarded es satishotorily proved, while, on the other hand, if they , as they of coarse must under such citessetmem they were left to die unpitied sod uneseisted, sad condemned not only by their self-elected but by the voice of the people, as guilty ciwitebcraft. In a somewhat modified form, seperstitious outrages were continued upon persons suspected of possessing the "evil power" until within the lent hundred yews; but it seems almost incredible that only ten days ago, at Hedinghsat, in this county, a woman should be found so far destitute of the soft and gentle qualities which characterise her sex as to practise a aerie, of smelts upon a poor old man seventy years of age, and plunge him, not once, but repeatedly, to the danger of his life, into a stream, because—so the report informs as"she alleged that the was bewitched, and believed that the old man had practised the evil art upon her!" The detail. of the case will be found in another column, and the evidence seem. most clearly to establish the charge laid against a Mrs. Smith and one of too working men who appear to have aided her in her savage task. Tills woman Smith, acting upon the supposition above-named, dragged the defeneelem old man — who, by-the-bye, is a Frenchman, bearing the sobriquet of " Llummy,"—to the aide of a brook, and pushed him into the water; the old fellow managed to crawl out, but was again and again thrust back by his feminine tormentor, who repeated the cowardly and unfeminine amault "several times," and even went eo far as to euggest that they should "swim" the old man " in the mill-head." Fortunately, however, for her, further outrage was nut perpetrated, and the woman —if we may so far mis-our the termat:Meted by one if not both of the men ' contented herself o ith ill-treating her grey-baired victim until he completely exhausted. Fortunately, weeny ; for had let assistants responded to her call, and pat the old man in "the mill-head," both they and would without doubt have been at this moment awaiting their trials upon • much more serious charge—manslaughter at least —murder in all human probability. According to the medical evidence, the aged sufferer was confined bed and in a dangerous condition forty-eight hours after he had been released from the inhuman grasp of the woman and her brutal assistant or aseistanta, as the case may he. Whether two or three were engaged in the I cowardly deed matters but little those who I joined in it knocked out nearly, though not quite all, the little remaining vitality the old man and left him in a mod pitiable stole of exhaustion. . . , facts of this aad case disclose a low state ' of morality on the part of the old man, equalled the woman by an absence of inhuman feeling and compassion. The atrocity of the circumstances was as glaring, that Mr. Fowke, one or the guardians of the parish of Sible Hedingham, : thought it his duty to submit the matter to magisterial investigation; and after a bearing of , three hours the Bench adjourned the rase to a Wore day. At the time we write the result of the second hearing has not reached VA, but we trust, in the name of humanity, that the guilty parties u ill receive such punishment am will not only deter them from repeating such dangerous and cruel practices, but act as • public example. Further comment is almost superfluous. We are here shown that we have yet much to do in the work of education and enlightenment ere our own advanced county is freed from the superstitious and cruel usages of the past --though for its credit we may say we believe the parties guilty of this fiendish onslaught upon a pour old man represent but an infinitesimally small portion ot the moat degraded and uneducated to be found within its borders. Pity rather than indignation should he the feeling aroused in our minds upon perssing these painful particulars, combined with a vigorous earnestness of purpose on the part of each and all of us to do our share in disseminating knowledge and education throughout the length and breadth of the land. A writing In one of the daily re- I the deaths sweetly that that article Weld not be worn in the Wm, eopecially i performing household deltas. enus gown= nir A lt.ivrs.—A few days a siwt melding is WArd-terrace, He•doct, informed be A thst • raven liof his tip •itulow of which wee open. The gentleman, arstmly croditin4 thesis.y, went and *novo .• A of the saintly day. of teethed spec dressim perking at • few which h. speedily drew Wrth • gukl Istnest PL mel tower& lb. open TA. wile. Wards tho inspoknt and thief awl sheolo blow at it ; the nes ion fee him, end it dew townie Hendon, •ith gliitenng pis In its mouth. Hod the bird not been observed an it* kenning. MA, is the how weak' ooduelitedly been blamed fur tas robbery. Matrons often known to commit thelta, mid it Is s.dnwenemon to OM gold rings is liar 


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001120/18630922/031/0003
Tiverton Gazette (Mid-Devon Gazette) - Tuesday 22 September 1863

THE HEDINGHAM WITCHCRAFT CASE.— The adjourned inquest on the body of the poor old Frenchman, who went by the name of Dummy, has led to no definite result. It will be remembered that he met his death in consequence of a ducking he had been subjected to by a Mrs. Smith, aided by two men, one of whom was named Stammers, because Mrs. Smith believed the feeble old man had bewitched her, and because he would not accept £3 from her, and go to her house and annul the charm. They pushed him two or three times into the brook, and when he escaped to his hut he slept all night in his wet and slimy clothes. He died in consequence, notwithstanding subsequent careful tending at the workhouse. The jury, after nearly two hours' warm discussion, were dismissed, not being able to agree. It was understood that all were unanimous for a verdict of manslaughter against Mrs. Smith, but two jurymen would not consent to a similar verdict against Stammers. The entire case will soon come before the Hedingham bench of magistrates.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000348/18630930/037/0007
Taunton Courier and Western Advertiser - Wednesday 30 September 1863

TO DO

THE HEDINGHAM WITCHCRAFT CASE. On Tuesday, Emma Smith and Samuel Stammers were charged, Castle Hedingham, with having caused the death of a poor old Frenchman, who was called Dummy, by putting him into a brook, when already suffering from a severe illness. The female prisoner was the wife beenhop-keeper in the village Kidgwell, about six miles from Sedingham, and Stammers a master carpenter, a small'way business. was a somewhat singular fact* that: nearly all of the 60 70 persons concerned in the outrage which resulted the death the deceased man were of the small tradesmen class, and that none agricultural labourers were mixed up in the affair. It "js also stated that none of those engaged were in any way* under the influence of liquor. The victim of this superstation was deaf and dumb, and his age was supposed have been about years. Being unable express himself, being of a. somewhat vivacious disposition, Was accustomed to make use eaergetis and somewhat grotesque gestures, which caused himtobe regarded with considerable awe. lived alone, in a wretched hut. Who he was, or whence he came, could not be ascertained. For the last Seven eight years had resided in Hedihgham. There is little doubt that gained his livitag a great extant by telling fortunes, if not by pretence witcacraft. Some hundreds of scraps of paper found by the police his hut after his death, and upon most of them were written questions. The following are fair samples:—"Her husband have left her manny years and she wants to Know whether is dead or alive. " What was the mysum not right i that "Do you charge any more!" The answer this query was doubtless satisfactory, for this momentous question was tben put, " Shall I ever marry Love letters from girls to their sweethearts were alio found, with "Shall marry aid" How many children shalllhavsr written in pencil on them. The most business-like of all the notes was the cart one, "Did we Kild your Dog. If you did I will send for the policeman." Nor were his patrons altogether confined to the lower orders. One letter states that the lady was " herself oil to see yoo, and she gave yon oil them things and theshfilen." the hovel were found, besides, between 400 and 500 walking sticks, quantity of umbrellas, soma French books, a number of tin boxes, a bag ot foreign coins, chiefly of the French and about ton ot rttbbish which it was found- impossible to classify the inventory that was taken. The evidence Tuesday substantially a repetition of that already given before th« Coroner's inquest. At its close, the Chairman, said that the Bench had resolved send both prisoners for trial the next assizes. The prisoner, Bmma Smith, waa then formally asked what she had to gay. She replied, 1 peculiar Voice, that she would tell the truth. The man had come to her house first. He spat upon her, and told' her that after a time she should be ill, and she was iIL A doctor came-to her twice in one night, but could not cure bar. The man Dummy came to her shop ten months ago and asked leave to sleep her shed. She let him, but in few days, when she wanted him to leave, mads signs, and wrote a door that she would be ill in ten days. He made her ill, and bewitched her, and she went everywhere, but no one could set her right again. She was afraid no medicine could do her any good.—The Chairman : Are you aware of the nature the charge againstyou, that you caused the death of the old by yetar conduct the 3rd of August?— The prisoner That night went to the Swan very bad, I went to the old gentleman and asked him to go home-with to me good. said he would not go. Gibson took him put him in my face, and told him to kiss me, but did not want to do that had a husband of my own. A number of plaiters of straw for bonnets came in and said, "How bad this woman is." There were forty fifty people there few of them men. They got him out. Some shoved him, some pelted him with mud, and did more to him than did. begged and prayed that would go home with me, but shouted would not unless liked. I do not deny that I put my hand to his head, but was bad could not lift aog, and this man here (Stammers) took him by the heels and thighs and threw him in the water, and then he (Stammers) jumped in and got him ont-Bail was accepted for Stammers. Bail would also have been taken for the female prisoner, but as it could not be procured she was conveyed to prison.
