# Bridget Cleary — Folklore


prior

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0005049/18920520/023/0003
London Daily Chronicle - Friday 20 May 1892

IRISH FAIRY TALES.

The common origin of the folk-tales of all countries is so well attested a fact that it need not be in the least surprising to find that these fairy stories `["Irish Fairy Tales." Edited, with an introduction, by W. B. Yeats, author of "The Wanderings of Oisin," &c. Illustrated by Jack B. Yeats. (London: T. Fisher Unwin.)]` which Mr. Yeats has collected from Irish sources are Hibernicised editions of those with which English readers are familiar. But the Irish take their fairy-lore at once more seriously and more humorously than other nations. With them the fairy superstition still lingers in all its primitive strength; to question the power, much less the existence, of the "good people"—as they are obsequiously termed, with a mental reservation on the subject of the adjective—at an Irish peasant gathering would be to incur dire risk of misfortune. Every village has its neighbouring "rath" or "royalty," circular bits of sward encompassed by ditches, and here the fairies live, as countless well-corroborated experiences can be produced to convince any regenerate son of Adam. Here the "Sheoques" perform their tantalising pranks on unfortunate human beings, the worst of these being a trick of stealing children away, and leaving a withered fairy of indeterminate age instead. Mr. Yeats mentions how, only three or four years ago, a man wrote to one of the Irish papers, telling of a case of this kind in his own village, and how the omniscient parish priest made the fairies deliver the stolen child up again. Moreover, the incredulous may further be informed that near the village of Colooney, in the county Sligo — the scene of the fiercest conflicts that marked a recent bye-election—there is an old woman who was taken in her youth, and when she came back at the end of seven years she had danced her toes off. The Irish fairies, like their congeners in other countries, are good and bad; and the good ones are engaged all the time in feasting, junketing, and dancing, in marrying and giving in marriage, and generally occupying themselves in all manner of revelry. It was among this class that the old lady of Colooney was fortunate enough to fall. The evil fairies, the "lepricaun," the "gonconer," or the "dullahan," on the other hand, are always working misfortune to mankind. and as the "sheoques" and the "merrows" are the brightest and most amusing of sprites, so the others are the most gruesome and deadly that imagination can picture. In this collection Mr. Yeats has given specimens of the performances of both classes, taken from the best Irish recorders of these orally transmitted legends. They include Carleton's charming story of "The Rival Kempers," in which we are told how in the olden time "kemps" were held at farmhouses — competitions in which the farmers' daughters showed their proficiency in spinning. With the exception of this bit of local colour the story is the counterpart of "Rumpelstiltzkin" as told in Mr. Laing's "Red Fairy Book." And so it is with nearly all the other tales in Mr. Yeats's volume. But the style in which they are told is so absolutely different, the atmosphere of humour and pure *gaité de coeur* that pervade them is so fresh and attractive that they can be read with delight by old as well as young. The Irish fairies, of course, all talk in the true peasant idiom with the most pronounced of brogues. In the story of "The Fairy Greyhound," for instance, in which Paddy M'Dermid was engaged in the sacrilegious work of digging for a pot of gold in a fairy "rath," he is interrupted by a noise beside him.

> He looked up, and just fornent him there sat on his baunches a comely-looking greyhound. "God save you," said Paddy, every hair on his head standing up as straight as a sally-twig, "Save you kindly,"" answered the greyhound—leaving out God, the beast, bekase he was the divil! Christ defend us from ever seeing the likes o' him.

Paddy had taken the precaution of making a ring of holy water round the scene of his digging operations, and the "civilitude" of the comely-looking greyhound was assumed in order to tempt him outside the sacred circle. The fashion in which the national religion has got interwoven with fairy superstition is very curious. In the story of "The Lady of Gollerus" — a mermaid whom Dick Fitzgerald encountered on the coast of Kerry combing her hair, "with the salt water shining upon it, making it appear in the morning light like melted butter upon cabbage" — the parish priest is introduced. Dick having snatched the mermaid's little enchanted cap, she was bound to follow him, and he took her straight to the priest to be married, to whom he explained, in extenuation of his request, that she was a king's daughter.

> "If she was the daughter of fifty kings," says Father Fitzgibbon, "you can't marry her, she being a fish." "Please your reverence," said Dick, again in an undertone, "she is as mild and beautiful as the moon." "If she was as mild and beautiful as the sun, moon, and stars all put together, I tell you Dick Fitzgerald," said the priest, stamping his right foot, "vou can't marry her, she being a fish." But she has all the gold that's down in the sea only for the asking, and I'm a made man if I can marry her"; and, said Dick, looking up slily, "I can make it worth anyone's while to do the job." "Oh, that alters the case entirely," says the priest; "why there's some reason now in what you say—marry her by all means, if she was ten times a fish. Money you know is not to be refused in these bad times, and I may as well have the hansel of it as another, that may be would not take half the pains in counselling you that I have done."

But the most amusing and in every way characteristic of these stories is Lover's version of "The Little Weaver." Every sentence, almost, of the recital shimmers with humour. Everyone knows the tale of the little weaver who suddenly took it into his head—because he had killed, at one blow, three score and ten flies that had gathered on his porridge—to become what Lover calls a "knight arriant," an avocation which ne describes as that of a "rale gintleman goin around the world for sport, with a swoord by his side, takin' whatever he plazes for himself." When the weaver is sent by the King of Dublin to kill the "dhraggin" in the bogs of Galway, he discreetly takes refuge from the monster in a tree. The "dhraggin" curls himself up at the foot, and in the night the weaver dropped down astride of his neck and caught him by the ears.

> "By the hokey, this is too bad intirely," says the dhraggin: "but if you won't let go," says he, "by the powers of wildfire, I'll give you a ride that'll astonish your sivin small sinses, my boy," and with that away he flew like mad; and where do you think he did fly ?— bedad, he flew sthraight for Dublin, divil a less. But the waiver bein' on his neck was a great disthress to him, and he would rather have had him an in-side passenger; but, any way, he flew and he flew till he kem slap up agin' the palace o' the king; for, bein' blind with the rage, he never seen it, and he knocked his brains out—that is, the small thrifle he had—and down he fell spacheless. An' you see, good luck would have it that the King o' Dublin wos lookin' out iv' his dhrawin' room windy, for divarshin, and whin he seen the waiver rhidin' an the fiery dhraggin — for he was blazin' like a tar-barrel — he called out to his coortyers to come and see the show. "By the powdhers of war, here comes the knight arriant," says the king, "rhidin' the dhraggin' that's all afire, and if he gots into the palace, yiz must be ready wid the fire-ingines," says he, "for to put him out."

The introduction by Mr. Yeats, and his appendix are both admirable of their kind. The two illustrations fairly realise the humour of the text, and the dainty little volume is a highly appropriate and attractive addition to Mr. Unwin's Children's Library Series.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000098/18950405/023/0010
Pall Mall Gazette - Friday 05 April 1895

IRISH WITCHES, SPELLS, AND CHARMS,

(BY AN IRISHWOMAN.)

The horrible case of witch burning at Clonmel has come as an extraordinary surprise not only upon the Civilized world at large, but upon those Irish people who would have said they knew the ins and outs of peasant superstition in Ireland. That superstition of various kinds is widespread we all know; but hitherto we have believed that it took only gentle forms, and have beee tender to it, hoping, indeed, that the Catholic priests in Ireland would not be too zealous to root it out. Its manifestations we looked upon with something of the same tenderness with which we regard the exquisite legends that have sprung up everywhere about the footsteps of the saints, and would have said that the world from which the peasant superstitions had disappeared was a baser, uglier, more unlovable world. The priests, no doubt, took much the same point of view, and had no conception of the horror lurking in darkness in such minds as those of Bridget Cleary's torturers. Irish Catholic Prayer books include even to-day in their table of sins for the examuination of conscience the using of spells or charms to find out things lost, or to learn things to come; but I doubt that any one has thought the matter of much importance hitherto. The procedure in the case of Bridget Cleary was exactly that supposed to be used in the case of fairy changelings. To hold the changeling above the fire on a shovel, or to thrust a red stick down its throat, is the drastic method proposed in the old stories of changelings; yet there is no record of such things being done. The mortal mother of a fairy babe more probably had too much tenderness for the weazened thing at her breast to permit such torture, and probably abided by its possession, unless, as sometimes happened, the fairy mother glided in in a gloaming, and ransomed back her child by the return of the mortal babe.

The belief in spells creeps up to the very gates of Dublin, if it does not pass them. At Lucan, with its associations of Dean Swift and Vanessa, is, or was, a fairy-man whose business it was to remove malignant spells or charms. If your cows stopped giving milk, or your churning produced nothing but froth, you sent for the fairy-man. The last person I knew who employed him was a farmer and horse dealer, who had fared with his horses as far afield as Vienna, and who had lived all his life among the proverbially sharp class of men who deal in the horse. He could put his finger on the covetous neighbour who was stealing the butter from his churn, but how to prove it was another matter. Far better employ the fairy-man. The remedy used in this case merely consisted in a ring of pealed witch-hazel being laid over the "dash" of the churn on the lid. There was a little fanfarronade about finding the hazel, however. The wizard set out running, with his eyes closed, by the wet hedgerows in a clinging autumn evening. Presently he came to a dead stop opposite the witch-hazel. As he peeled and plaited it he muttered an incantation. "And you believe in all that, man alive?" said the farmer who was the subject of the confidence. "Believe in it!" cried the other sturdily. "Why wouldn't I believe in it? Sure there's three pound of butter where there was one before!"

I have been told of a fairy "blast" by the recipient of it. She, at the age of three, fell asleep while gathering blackberries on a fairy rath. When she awoke all [but] one hip was black. Her mother took her to a blacksmith, who was something of a fairy doctor. He worked some spell over her at peep of day in his forge, and by means of a red-hot iron. But it was done secretly, since some one must suffer for the fairy blast, and since the blacksmith had meddled with it, it was as like to be his wife or one of his children. So he wrought the cure while his good woman was sleeping. However, it was the mother of the child who had received the blast who was taken a very short time afterwards. Every one understood when she died that it was in order that her child might be spared.

Another woman told me of a castle possessed by fairies in the county Galway. She said she had often stood outside the walls at night and seen the windows lighted up, and had heard the music and dancing and the swishing of silk dresses. The young owner of this castle was taken by the fairies in his youth. He was rapt away oue midnight, and an old, uncanny imp left in his place. Often when the nurse or mother had left the room for a moment they would hear within the changeling playing on a fairy harp. After a twelvemouth they found a wise woman to break the spell, and as suddenly as it had gone the rosy mortal babe was restored to its cradle and the elf whisked away to fairyland.

I talked a little while ago with a woman who had seen the banshee. As a child she had lived with her aunt, and the old woman, being taken suddenly ill, died, without any other companion. When she was dying the child crouched on the bed-foot, her eyes hidden in terror, but suddenly looking up was aware of something shading the window. It was a small pale woman's face, with wild black eyes, and the black hair floating like a veil showed half-transparent against the moonbeams.
  
Every Irish peasant is full of stories of ghosts. If one happens to be protecting you on your way home from the train of a dark night, as ofter befell me, and you get him in the mind, he will make the hair of your head stand up. If you try to exploit him, however, he is mum. It is only a sympathizer who will hear his ghostly experiences; and a disquieting thing is that the worst things will have invariably happened to him on the very road you are taking. At this very spot of the road he was first aware of the unnaturally tall veiled woman who swept by himn without speaking; or over there, in the dark ditch forennist you, he heard the chain clanking as the black dog rushed by in the storm-wind.

The Clonmel horror for the moment makes our inocent superstitions guilty. Are we then to do away with our fairies, our banshees, our leprechauns? The leprechauns or fairy shoemaker, belongs as much to the autumn fields as the chirping grasshopper. He can lead you to the buried crock of gold if you but succeed in capturing him and holding him tight— the little red man with his conical green cap. He may play you some such shabby trick as chanced with a peasant once. He indicated the crock of gold, or the spot where it lay buried, in a thirty-acre field under a yellow ragweed. And his captor let him go. But since ragweeds grow commonly he took care to tie his garter round the neck of this special one, and postponed his digging till dawn. Lo, and behold you! when he came at dawn there was a field thick with ragweed, and on the neck of every one a garter. And though he dug and dug, he never came upon the crock of gold.

Are we to lose all the pretty host because there are savages in Clonmel? The one savage superstition I have known before is the death spancel—that ghastly love-charm which is made of a strip of skin, unbroken from head to heel, taken from the dead, and tied around the ankles of him or her whose love is desired between midnight and dawn. A Mayo man assured me he had seen a death-spancel which had wrought horrible havoc, binding the son of a noble house to a half-gipsy peasant, but now, its days of hurt over, it is swinging high in the rafters of a little chapel, to be used as a terrible example when his reverence was in the mood to preach a lurid sermon.

Such things are kept from the priest till they have to be discovered. Curiously enough, the pastor himself is not exempt in the popular mind from a certain unlucky influence. "A priest's marriage"—-that is, one arranged by a priest—is proverbially unlucky, and cattle-dealers fight shy of a priest's cow in the fair.

Quite beautiful, and scarcely belonging to the region of superstition, is the custom of the priest blessing a field in spring time. But what do you think of the sturdy Orangemen of the North who send for the priest, when they fear that their cattle or their field has been "overlooked," to remove the ban by his blessing. This is common custom. Perhaps they justify it to themselves by regarding his reverence as an able exponent of the black art, and so set a wizard to catch a wizard.

Widely syndicated in eg
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002280/18950413/025/0002
Wigton Advertiser - Saturday 13 April 1895

A CORRESPONDENT of the Spectator, referring to the shocking "witchcraft" case in Clonmel, maintains that Mrs. Cleary did not meet with her end owing to the belief in witchcraft or in demoniacal possession which has real hold in Ireland. "She perished," the correspondent says, "owing to the belief in the fairies. In Munster, when a child appears delicate, or a young woman consumptive or hysterical, the conclusion often is that the child or the woman has been carried off by the fairies, to be made a playmate or nurse to the young fairies, and that a fairy substitute resembling the person taken away is deposited in their place, which gradually declines, and ultimately dies. The belief is that if the changeling be tortured by fire its fairy parents will hear its cries, rush to its aid, curry it back to fairyland, and at the same moment restore the real person who will be found sleeping calmly in the bed. Cleary and 'the neighbours' evidently believed that the being they tortured was not Cleary's wife, but a changeling. He addressed her, 'In the name of God, are you Bridget Boland?' (her maiden name), believing that thus adjured the being would confess it was a fairy. Again, after the burning, many of the men of the locality sat up all night in a 'fort' (earth embankment of ancient Irish village), armed with blackhandled knives. These poor people thought that a fairy procession would pass by, that in he midst would be Mrs. Cleary riding on a grey horse, and that if anyone rushed forward and cut her bonds with a black-handled knife (a potent weapon against all evil spirits), she would at once be restored to the world. In the 'Tales of Terror and Wonder' it was thus that Fair Janet rescued Tam Lin from fairies. She sat at Giles Cross on Halloween, at the 'murk and midnight hour,' when she sees the fairy host go by:

'First she let the black pass by,  
And net she let the brown,  
But quickly ran to the milk-white steed,  
And drew rider down.'

Thus Fair Janet rescued Tam Lin; thus the poor dwellers on the slope of Shore-na-mon (the Witches' Hill, a haunted mountain) believed that they would rescue Bridget Cleary."



## Belief in Changelings as a Defence

```{admonition} TO DO
:class: dropdown

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0005049/18950710/019/0003
London Daily Chronicle - Wednesday 10 July 1895

THE CLONMEL "WITCH" BURNING.

THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY CHRONICLE,

Sir,— Your issue of the 6th informs me that the trial of Michael Cleary for mis-called "witch"-burning has ended in a verdict of manslaughter being taken by consent, resulting in a sentence of tweniy years' penal servitude.

The punishment necessary in the case will appear excessive to those familiar with the details of the tragedy, and pending some action which may secure mitigation of the sentence, permit me to briefly outline the grounds which justify such action.

Thie poor, illiterate Cleary shared the belief common to the Celtic peoples that illness, especially of the, to him, perplexing kind that afflicted his wife, is due to the real person having been abducted by fairies, who substitute a changeling resembling the person. Consequently, Cleary had no doubt that the creature whom he was torturing was not Bridget Cleary at all, but a changeling whom the fairies would rescue when they saw her thus treated, and at the same time restore Bridget. "You will soon see my wife come down the chimney," said Cleary to his onlooking neighbours.

So ingrained is the belief, that after the poor creature's death these same neighbours repaired to a so-called fairy fort in the belief that she would appear as a captive in the possession of the "good people," when they would have rushed forward to rescue her.

Your space at this juncture is too valuable to allow room for the remarks which could be made upon the origin and persistence of a belief which has led to so tragic an event.

It will occur to many that for the survival of such superstitions the responsibility should be shared by the Christian organisations which surround these poor peasants of Ballybadlea.— I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

EDWARD CLODD  
President of the Folk-Lore Society  
11, Old-square, Lincoln's Inn, W.C.,  
July 8.

```

Following is typical of the contunuing confusion round the case - witch or fairy


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001634/18950713/091/0004
Newcastle Daily Chronicle - Saturday 13 July 1895

The Witch-burning Case.

There is a good deal in the plea which Mr. Edward Clodd, the president of the Folklore Society, has just urged. Mr. Clodd thinks that the punishment of the "poor illiterate" Cleary, fur burning his wife as a witch, and sharing "the belief current among the Irish peasants and elsewhere." has been excessive. Cleary was sentenced to 20 years' penal servitude for simply being the victim of a superstitious conviction that "when illness of a wasting or mysterious kind overtakes a person, the real individual has been spirited away by the fairies, and a changeling, resembling the person, substituted." The "Law Journal" also reminds its readers that Sir Willliam Blackstone in 1765 — on1y a short time ago, comparatively — wrote "that to denv the possibility — nay the actual existence — of witchcraft and sorcery is flatly to contradict the revered Word of God in various passages of the Old and New Testaments." If a highly educated man like Sir William Blackstone could argue thus in the eighteenth century, it does seem hard that a poor Irish peasant with his Bible and "Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live" to guide him, should be so severely dealt with in the nineteenth.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000275/18950712/001/0002
Sheffield Evening Telegraph - Friday 12 July 1895

IGNORANCE NO EXCUSE.

EVENING TELEGRAPH AND STAR, SHEFFIELD. FRIDAY, JULY 12, 1895. Few tales of barbarity have more disgraced our vaunted nineteenth century civilisation than the tragedy known as the Clonmel "witch burning." A wretched woman named Cleary prostrated by illness was treated with almost incredible cruelty by her husband and a gang of confederates; after minor tortures she was half roasted over the fire, and when death mercifully released her from her sufferings her body was buried in a shallow grave with just so much respect as might be accorded a dog flung into a dyke. The husband has escaped the punishment which seemed most in accordance with the crime. His neck has been spared, but twenty years' penal servitude is before him as expiation of his atrocious conduct. It might have been supposed that he would have congratulated himself, and have been generally deemed lucky to have escaped the extreme penalty which usually attaches to similar misdeds `(sic)`. There are, however, those who protest against the punishment as excessive, and the president of the Folk-lore Society, Mr. Edward Clodd, comes forward with a brief on the wretched convict's behalf. Cleary's illiteracy was alone at fault. He had no intention of harming his wife, but he was merely anxious to sufficiently illtreat the changeling sent by the fairies that the substitute would be glad to revert to the old position of affairs. This was the defence set up at the trial. It saved Cleary from the gallows, and Mr. Clodd thinks it ought to have further excused him the punishment awarded by the judge. That some such idea possessed Cleary may be possible, but its allowance as sufficient excuse for his conduct would have been to palliate an atrocious crime, and to open the door to wholesale repetitions of similar behaviour. Cleary may have been animated by some gross superstition, but that he was sufficiently civilised to appreciate the lawlessness of the "charms" he employed is sufficiently clearly indicated by the secrecy in which he enveloped his operations. If the poor of Ballybadlea are so benighted, so wrapped in medieval superstition, Cleary's fate may prove a not-ineffectual warning, while as regards the man himself the sentence, heavy as it is, can hardly be regarded, save by the hyper sentimental, as excessive punishment for one who, to wife or to "changeling," could employ methods of such undiluted barbarity. The appeal on Cleary's behalf may claim the support of the sentimentalists who in every convict's behaviour can espy a redeeming trait, but it can hardly prove of much practical benefit to the prisoner himself.



https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000627/18950711/030/0002
Southern Echo - Thursday 11 July 1895

GROSS IGNORANCE AMONGST THE PEASANTRY.

Mr. Edward Clodd, president of the Folk Lore Society, protests against the sentence of twenty years' penal servitude on Michael Cleary, who was convicted of manslaughter in the Clonmel witch-burning case. Mr. Clodd's point is that Cleary was so grossly ignorant as to believe the body of his wife to be a changeling. The wretched peasant never for a moment imagined that he was doing harm to Bridget Cleary. He thought the real Bridget had been spirited away, and that she would "come down the chimney" when the changeling was burnt. Now, it is surely clear that a man sunk in such gross superstition is no more responsible for his actions than a criminal lunatic. No tribunal would send a lunatic to penal servitude for twenty years. The weakness of the law in the Clonmel case was shown by the conviction for manslaughter. If Cleary was to be regarded as a deliberate criminal, he ought to have been convicted of murder. The authorities shrank from the idea of hanging a man who killed his wife when under the impression that he was actually rescuing her from witchcraft; but it is plain that the compromise ought not to have stopped here. If the burning of Bridget Cleary was not murder, there is no logical consistency in treating it as manslaughter because the husband could not be held responsible for the capital crime. To punish sheer ignorance with twenty years' penal servitude, when you do not punish it with the gallows, is bad law and bad morals. Mr. Clodd suggests that the real blame for the Clonmel tragedy rests on the spiritual pastors of the people. "It will occur to many that for the survival of such superstitions the responsibility should be shared by the Christian organisations which surround these poer peasants of Ballybadlea." We are afraid that the teaching of the Roman Catholic priesthood in Ireland is not always conducive to pure reason, and that the of superstition is thickened by some orthodox beliefs. At any rate, a certain amount of discredit rests on the civilising agencies of Clonmel, and if they have failed to make Michael Cleary understand that he must not burn his wife with the idea that she is a changeling, why should he suffer twenty years' penal servitude for their neglect or incapacity? If lunacy is a plea against punishment, surely ignorance of the grossest type is a plea equally strong.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001965/18950713/065/0004
Glasgow Evening Post - Saturday 13 July 1895

Mr Edward Clodd, the president of the Folk Lore Society, puts forward a plea for Cleary, the Irishman who burned his wife, which, though reasonable enough, is hardly likely to have much effect during the turmoil of a General Election. Cleary was sentenced to twenty years' penal servitude for being the victim of a deeply rooted Irish superstition that "when illness of a wasting or mysterious kind overtakes a person the real individual has been spirited away by the fairies, and a changeling resembling the person substituted." When we recall the fact that the Church burned "witches" to death two centuries ago and that an eminent and learned man like Sir William Blackstone as late as 1765 wrote "that to deny the existence of witchcraft and sorcery is flatly to contradict the revered word of God," the crime of Cleary, the peasant, is not so unfavourable as it might seem on the surface. As we said the other day, a good deal of the responsibility for his act rests upon the preachers and teachers of Ireland.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001551/18950718/027/0002
Banbury Advertiser - Thursday 18 July 1895

*Widely syndicated*

The sentence of 20 years' penal servitude on Michael Cleary, the chief actor in the appalling case of "witch-burning" at Clonmel, has provoked the intervention of Mr. Edward Clodd, the President of the Folk Lore Society. Mr. Clodd urges that Michael Cleary played his part in that terrible tragedy in the belief that his victim was not his wife, but a "changeling." The details of the heartrending story make it clear that the wretched man thought he was defeating the powers of evil in what he did. Twenty years' penal servitude for an action, however diabolical, that has its root in ignorance and superstition, and is not criminal in intent, is too severe a punishment. We (Star) think with Mr. Clodd that this sentence should be revised. It may have been necessary to pass the sentence to shew that men may not inflict horrible tortures on others, even in the belief that they are recovering them from evil spirits. This case should do much to kill the ghastly superstition in Ireland, but Cleary inspires our pity as well our horror, and in his case clemency would be wise.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004833/18950715/007/0001
Morning Leader - Monday 15 July 1895

Mr. Edward Clodd, the president of the Folk-lore Society, who is interesting himself in the case of the wretched man Cleary, who was sentenced to twenty years' penal servitude for burning his wife to death under the belief that she was a "changeling," is a many-sided man. Although he has written books on myths and popular science that have been translated into almost every language, and bave been embossed for the blind, his literary efforts are produced in his leisure time only. By day he is the active secretary of the London Joint Stock Bank, a position that is no sinecure. Mr. Clodd is a native of Aldeburgh in Suffolk, the birthplace of the poet Crabbe, where he has a cottage by the sea.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003187/18950719/025/0002
Evening Mail - Friday 19 July 1895

THE IRISH CHANGELING BURNERS. TO THE EDITOR. Sir,— It is probable that most students of superstition will agree with Mr. Clodd in hoping that, if possible, the sentence of Cleary may be mitigated. If ever a man "knew not what he did" it was, apparently, this unhappy peasant. He was in the mental condition of some natives of India, so described by Mr. Knighton in an article on "Demoniacal Possession in India" (*Nineteenth Century*, October, 1880). An exorcist at Ghonspore thus reports his method:— "I tied her hands behind her. I tied her feet. Cotton wicks steeped in oil were prepared. They were lighted, and stuffed up nostrils and into her. It cured her." The sufferer, named Melata, confirmed this account. The Chinese usually drive out the devil (if they do not worship him) with needles (Nevins: "Demon Possession in China"). In Ireland the victim was not supposed to be poisoned by a fiend, but actually to be a new substituted unearthly person, beyond protection of human law. If no doubt exists as be the presence of this belief the crime of Cleary becomes a misfortune, the result, as it were of invincible ignorance. The law cannot make allowances for such ignorance but pity may, perhaps, be permitted to plead for one already punished by the discovery of his own horrible and all but incredible error. A punishment sufficient to mark and blazon abroad the law's sense of the nature of the act, and of the widespread Irish belief which suggested it, might perhaps be enough. That the belief is still common, Mr. Jeremiah Curtin shows in his recent Work on "Irish Ghost and Fairy Lore." I remain obediently yours, ANDREW LANG  
1, Marloss-road, W., July 13.

TH But, although there are tales of the fairies in Curtin's "Irish Ghost and Fairy Lore," there is no explicit mention of "changelings".

https://archive.org/details/McGillLibrary-osl_tipperary-witch-case_BibOsl7636-17653/page/n5/mode/2up
The Tipperary (or Clonmel) witch case: [transcripts of newspaper reports &c. concerning Bridget Cleary, burned as a witch, and the trial of her husband and neighbours for murder, in 1895]
by"

Publication date 1917

COPY of a letter written by R. Bagwell,Esq., foreman of the jury which tried the prisoners, to A.W.Clodd, Esq., president of the Folk Lore Society.

Marfield, Clonmel  
27 July, 1895.

Dear Sir,

To find out the truth about anything in Ireland is always difficult. We have language, general law, and superficial social structure as in England, but no two countries are more unlike. If English politicians always understood that, we might do better.

The belief in this country (evidence is another thing) is that Michael Cleary wanted to get rid of his wife because she was in his way. She had no children, and he wanted to marry a woman whom he knew from his own knowledge would have them, I have not heard the name of "l'autre", but I dare say it could be had. I am told she was delivered of a child (by Michael Cleary) in Cashel workhouse.

It was proved that Michael Cleary threatened Johanna Burke, the principal witness against him, if she said anything about what she saw. These threats certainly weighed with her & probably with the others too. To "inform" against anyone in Ireland has always been dangerous, for it is unpopular, and unpopularity is a crime in Ireland as everyone who reads the papers knows.

The exact part which superstition played in the matter is very doubtful. Witchcraft, magic," or what goes among the country people here by the name of "pishogues", are perhaps a good deal believed in, but no one can say how much. When the question is raised the peasantry thihk it safer to pass by on the other side, & to say nothing, as there may be "something in it".

I would have no mercy on four or five men who saw a woman roasted to death before them, & never said one word to save her. If superstition was the leading motive, which I doubt, then an object lesson ought to be set. I believe they were actuated simply by general funk, which is the leading ingredient in Irish politics.

In your letter to the *Times* you said something about the blame to be thrown on Xtian organizations. These people were all Roman Catholics. Roman Catholicism in its Irish form is almost all superstition. They are slaves to the priests, but without liking them. The parish priest in this case was much blamed, but he may possibly have been hood-winked. Now, he is probably the only person who knows all the facts, but through the confessional.

I am not in the confidence of the late Attorney-general, but the probability is that the Crown accepted a verdict of manslaughter rather than that the prosecution should fail altogether. With our miserable juries it is often the BEST THING TO DO. The bill of indictment was ample to sustain it. Cleary basted his wife with oil & burned her slowly to death. The medical evidence was that the entrails protruded &. that the thigh bones & pelvis had the flesh completely roasted off them. And the gallant Tipperary boys looked on.

Mr Justice William o'Brien tried the case, who is as good a judge as there is on the bench.

I have not a paper with the trial but will try to get you one. The evidence is the same virtually as that before the magistrates, but less full, as is always the case. A judge of assize keeps to the point, whereas the preliminary magistrate must "fish".

Cleary worked for years as a cooper in the brewery here. I will make enquiries as to what character he bore. They were not very poor people.

Yours faithfully ,

(sgd.) R. Bagwell.

A.W.Clodd, Esq.

(Copied 23-1-20. The original and other  documents returned to Mr. Clodd.)






https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0005049/18950801/021/0003

London Daily Chronicle - Thursday 01 August 1895


Also in eg:
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004260/18950810/070/0006
County Tipperary Independent and Tipperary Free Press - Saturday 10 August 1895

THE "WITCH BURNING" AT CLONMEL.

THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY CHRONICLE.

Sir,— As you were good enough to insert a letter from me in reference to the sentences on the so-called "witch-burners" of Ballyvadlen, at the Clonmel Assizes, will you permit me to say that, through the courtesy of Mr. Richard Bagwell, foreman of the grand jury which found a true bill against Cleary and his accomplices, I have since had before me the evidence in full on which the verdicts are based, and have been furnished with information about Cleary's antecedents. Although the evidence goes to show that the belief in "changelings" exists among the Irish peasantry, and has led to inhuman acts, it appears certain that other and wholly base motives prompted the murder of Bridget Cleary, and the council of this society agrees with me that the case does not warrant action with a view to obtain mitigation of the sentences. —I am, Sir, your obedient servant, EDWARD CLODD, President of the Folk Lore Society, 11, Old-square, Lincoln's-inn, July 31.



---

http://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001652/18950801/009/0001
Globe - Thursday 01 August 1895

We congratulate Mr. Edward Clodd, the President of the Folk Lore Society, on having arrived at a more sensible state of mind with regard to the Clonmel witch-burning case. Actuated by the belief that the barbarous murder of Bridget Cleary was due to the prevalence of the "changeling" superstition, Mr. Clodd protested against the infliction of a twenty years' sentence on the principal culprit. But the foreman of the jury which tried tho case has furnished him with a full report of the evidence at the trial, and a perusal of it has sufficed to convince Mr. Clodd that "other and wholly base motives" were responsible for the crime. In common with the criminal he has learned that a little folk-lore is dangerous thing.

----




--
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002093/18950330/086/0005
Dublin Evening Telegraph - Saturday 30 March 1895

OUR LINGERING SUPERSTITIONS.

The Tipperary "Bewitched" Case.

(SPECIAL: TO THE EVENING TELEGRAPH.)

The recent terrible occurrence near Clonmel has revived in some measure the memory of the ancient cruelties in connection with witchcraft, a belief in which was one of the most persistent of the superstitions of the world. Other superstitions died away under the influence of advancing knowledge, but this showed the greatest vitality even in the minds of educated persons. The belief in witches cannot be said in any degree to have arisen with Christianity. In fact it bears on the fate of it the strongest evidence of being a pagan survival. Amongst the pagans it was the power of some one of the gods which was sought to be invoked. In later times the devil was substituted, and with this superstition the belief in changelings, namely, the abstraction of a child and the substitution of a fairy wearing the same form, seems to be closely connected. Beliefs of this kind seem to have been universal, and the allusions to them in English literature are very frequent. In "The Midsummer Night's Dream" Shakespeare makes the quarrel between Oberon and Titania turn upon the question of the possession of a "changeling boy", whose mother was a witch and voteress of the fairy queen. In "Macbeth," as every one recollects, the witches fill a large space, and their incantations are described in great detaiL In fact the Great Bard, in a very large number of his plays, made a most liberal use of the witch and the fairy for dramatic purposes. The accounts of the machinations of the witches in Macbeth, however, were drawn from older sources, and the notion of wearing away the life of a person by constructing images winch were gradually destroyed, the object of the witchcraft being supposed to decline away and die at the same time, may be traced to very ancient times. Horace, indeed, mentions very similar proceedings on the part of witches, and reference to incantations of a like kind are found in other ancient authors.

In one form or another the idea came down the centuries, and was the subject in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in England. Scotland was before that time the abiding place of witches, warlocks, and professors of demonology. When James VI of Scotland became James I of England he brought the institution of witch-hunting along with him. He himself wrote a "Treatise on Demonologie," with a view to "resolve the doubting hearts of many as to the fearful abounding of those detestable slaves of the devil, witches or enchanters." In this treatne, which is in the form of a dialogue, it is declared that "no sex, age, nor rank should be excused from the punishment of death, according to the laws of God, the civil and imperial law, and the municipal laws of all Christian nations." Then the question is, "What to judge of death I pray you?" to which the answer was, "It is commonlie used by fyre, but there is an indifferent thing to be used in every country. sometime to the law and custome thereof." James put his "law and custome" into practice extensively, and hundreds of people were burned or hanged. The trade of witch-hunting became a regular one, especially as there was a reward of twenty shillings for every witch brought to "justice." One of the most celebrated witch-hunters was one Mathew Hopkins, of Essex, who is said in one year to have procured the execution of no less than 60 reputed witches. Most of the evidence upon which this and similar ruffians procured these judicial murders was, of course, either perjured or so trivial that only a superstitious age would attach any importance to it. Hopkins pretended to be able to recognise the *special* marks of witches, which were moles, scorbutic blotches, and warts, that frequently grow large and pendulous in old age, but which it was pretended were teats to suckle imps. A favourite method of test was to tie together the thumbs and toes of suspected persons and drop them into a deep river or pond. If they sank they were assumed to be innocent and were only drowned. If by any superhuman exertion they succeeded in keeping afloat they were held guilty and taken out to be burned or hanged.

In many cases, however, really credible evidence was presented of attempts at witchcraft. So deeply was the whole public mind filled with the idea that enchantments were possible, that wicked persons, no doubt, did their best to fill the role of witches. They practised incantations and supposed magic arts in order to injure or kill their neighbours, and really supposed themselves capable of mysterious and magical powers. No doubt, as these were criminals in intent, considering the rough justice of the time, society did not lose much by their removal. The case of the Lancashire witches in 1612 is an instance of this. These people played the role of witches apparently in order to frighten their neighbours, and then they deceived themselves. They were finally, to the number of ten, executed on the testimony of a grandchild of one of them, of nine years of age, whose imagination had apparently been impressed, and who gave an account of how the devil in the shape of a black dog had appeared to his grandmother. In 1634 a case occurred in which several people were nearly hanged on the evidence of a boy who alleged he had seen the accused take different shapes - of a hare, a horse, etc. Seventeen witches were condemned to death, but the judge granted a respite, and Charles I. held an investigation in person into the case, with the result that it was discovered that the boy's testimony was suborned by his father, and all were pardoned. This was practically the last of the English Cases, but so late as 1679 several unfortunates were executed in Scotland for witchcraft. In the indictment four widows are charged with holding meetings with the devil, and that they "did eat and drink with the devile and with one another and with witches;" and further, one of the accused was declared to have become "the devil's servante and promeis to follow him," whereupon his Majesty "took her by the right hand, whereby it was for eight days greivowelie pained," subsequent to which they had several "choppens of ale" together, and the devil gave the witch "one fyne merk piece of gold, which a lyttle after becam ane skleitee stone;" and furthermore that "ye and ilk of you was at a meeting with the devile and other witches at the Croce of Murestain upon the threttein of October last, where you all danced, and the devile acted the piper." The jury condemned these poor people, and they were convicted to be worried at a stake, and their bodies burned, which sentence was carried out.

In America a dreadful series of judicial murders were committed on the accusation of certain fanatics, some of them ministers, who charged persons with witchcraft. The accusers pretended to be gifted with "spectral sight," ie. that they saw the "witches," otherwise inviable, going about their nefarious work. These were gsent about from place to place to identify the evil-doers and hundreds of lives were destroyed on their evidence. Ultimately, however, persons in a high position were involved in accusations and the veil was torn from the eyes of the public. The whole conspiracy then broke up and people began to wonder that they had ever been deceived.

In Ireland the practice does not seem to have prevailed to the same extent as in England and Scotland. The Irish superstition tended rather to connect old "knowledgeable women" with the fairies rather than with the Powers of Darkness. There opposes to be only one genuine recorded case of trial and burning for witchcraft in Ireland. This was the case of the Lady Alice Kytler or Kettle, who was tried before a spiritual court at Ossory— not far from the scene of the Cleary tragedy—for heresy and witchcraft—with her son William Outlaw and Petronil and Basil her accomplices. The Lady Alice was charged with having "swept the streets of Kilkeanie between complaine and twilight, raking all the filth towards the doores of her sonne William Outlaws, murmuring secretlie with hir selfe these words:—

"To the house of William my sonne,  
His all the wealth of Kilkennie towne."

This lady was of high family, and her husband was Sir John la Poer, between whom and the bishop who cited the lady to appear a deadly feud commenced. The lady's fate is not certain. According to one account she was executed, according to another the accused at the first conviction abjured and did penance. "but shortlie after they were found in relapse, and then was Potroniel burnt at Kilkennie; the other twain might not be heard of. She (Petronill) at the hour of her death accused the said William as privy to their sorceries, whom the bishop held in durance nine weeks." The bishop in the end had the worst of it, however, for we learn that at the instance of Arnold le Poer, then seneschal of Kilkenny, the prisoner was released, and "afterwards corrupted she seneschal with bribes to prosecute the bishop so that he thrust him into prison for three months." All these proceedings, however, happened as far back as 1324, so that the dust of the middle ages may be said to be upon them. Since then witch burning and persecution have no place in Irish annals.

In the present century, however, an old lady known as Biddy Early existed in the county Clare who was said to practice witchcraft. Persons coming from the most distant parts of the country were, it is said, recognised by this beldame by name and their business known before they mentioned it. She died, however, it is gratifying to relate, repentant.

The belief in changelings, which was common to nearly all cases of consumption in the young, has now practically died out, and those who know the peasantry best were amazed and shocked to find the Clonmel case turning up to demonstrate that these old beliefs die hard. The Cleary case seems to be a mixture of the witch and fairy theories, because the ancient superstition about changelings seemed to have been entirely concerned with young persons. When a child began to pine away it was supposed that the real child was with the fairies, and the remedy was to put the changeling to the test of fire by placing it on a hot shovel, when the fairy would disappear and the real child return. There appears to be few, if any, recorded cases where this cruel experiment was tried. All the folk stories usually record that the moment the red shovel was produced the fairy fled, without waiting for any further test, and the child was restored. In the Cleary case the people who did her to death seem almost to have convinced the poor woman herself that she was possessed. It is by no means to be supposed however, that this is an isolated case. In 1866 a poor Frenchman was drowned in Essex, being "swam by a mob who believed him to be a warlock." In 1879, in Norfolk, a man was fined for assaulting a girl whose mother had "charmed him with a walking toad." Even in 1890 there was an inquest of a child in Suffolk, the parents of which declared that its death was due to witchcraft, and swore the child was consumed, and that they smelt brimstone.



--
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000644/18790412/003/0003
Birmingham Mail - Saturday 12 April 1879

MODERN WITCHCRAFT

A paper local reports the following case of alleged witchcraft, which recently was heard at the East Dereham Petty Sessions:—

William Bulwer, of Etling Green, was charged with assaulting Christiana Martins, a young girl, who resides near the Etling Green toll bar. Complainant deposed that she was of eighteen years of age, and on Wednesday, the 2nd inst, the defendant came to her and abused her. The complainant, who looked scarce more than a child, repeated, despite the efforts of the magistrates' clerk to stop her, and without being in the least abashed, some of the worst language it was possible to conceive— conversation of the most gross description, alleged to have taken place between herself and the defendant. They appeared to have got from words to blows, and, while trying to fasten the gate, the defendant hit her across the hand with a stick. She alleged that there was no cause for the abuse and the assault, so far as knew, and in reply to rigid cross-examination as to the origin of the quarrel, adhered to this statement. Mrs. Susannah Gathercole also corroborated the statement as to the assault, adding that the defendant said the complainant's mother was a witch. Defendant then blazed forth in righteous indignation, and, when witness said she knew no more about the origin of the quarrel, he said "Mrs. Martins is an old witch, gentlemen, that is what she is, and she charmed me, and I got no sleep for her for three nights, and one night, at half-past eleven o'clock, I got up because I could not sleep, and went out and found a 'walking toad' under a clod that been dug up with a three-pronged fork. That is why I could not rest; she is a bad old woman; she put this toad under there to charm me, and her daughter is just as bad, gentlemen. She would bewitch any one, she charmed me, and I go no rest day or night for her, till I found this 'walking toad'— (laughter) — under the turf. She dug a hole and put it there to charm me, gentlemen, that is the truth; she is a bad old witch. I got the toad out, and put it in a cloth, and took it upstairs and showed it to my mother and 'throwed' it in to the pit in the garden. I can bring it and show it to you, gentlemen."— Mr. Hyde (laughing): What do you say, she bewitched you? Defendant: Yes, sir. She went round this here "walking toad" after she had buried it; and I could not rest by day or sleep at night till I found it. She is a bad old witch, and is not going to come it me though. Her daughter is as bad as she is, and encourages her in it. The Bench: Do you to church? Defendant: Sometimes I goes to church and sometimes to chapel, and sometimes I don't go nowhere. Her mother is bad enough to do anything; and to go and put the "walking toad" in the hole like that, for a man which never did nothing to her, she is not fit to live, gentlemen; to go and do such a thing, it is not as if I had done anyting to her. She looks at lots of people, and I nknow she wil do some one harm. (Laughter!) The Chairman: DO you know this man, Superintendent Symonds? Is he sane? (Laughter.)— Superintendent Symonds: Yes sir perfectly. (Laughter)— Defendant: It is quite true, gentlemen, I showed the toad to my mother, and I can bring it for you to see.— The Chairman said he was very sorry the defendant was so foolish as to believe such rubbish and he would be fined 1s. and 12s. 6d. costs.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000408/18750617/038/0005
Dorset County Chronicle - Thursday 17 June 1875

TO DO

Compulsory education

... believing in witchcraft ...

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0003442/18750130/082/0005
Hull Daily News - Saturday 30 January 1875

Witchcraft in Devonshire.

A remarkable case of credulity, the Exeter correspondent of the *Pall Mall Gazette* writes, came before the Exeter magistrates on Wednesday. It appeared from the evidence that a woman named Arthurs, a fortune-teller, was consulted by another woman on behalf of her son, who was suffering from internal complaint. Arthurs pretended to read from a book the nature of the complaint and the remedy required. She also went through some mystic performances with a pack of cards, and said if the young man did not recover by a certain date he would die. Arthurs gave the woman some mixture in a bottle, for which she charged £2, but the invalid did not get better. The mother told Arthurs that she believed she was able to effect a cure. The police, however, got hold of the affair, and arrested Arthurs, who told a police-officer that she had cured "hundreds of cases," and that "she was very clever in that way." A witness said she had also consulted Arthurs, and had recommenced the woman in this case to her. The magistrates sent Arthurs to prison for two months, and ordered £3 found on her to be kept towards her maintenance in gaol. By a singular coincidence a witchcraft case also came before the Newton Abbot board of guardians the same morning. A labouring man applied for relief, saying he had been bewitched and was unable to work. In reply to the chairman, the man said he believed in witchcraft. Admiral Wise, one of the guardians, said there was no doubt the believed he was bewitched, and his faith could not be shaken: his illness, however, was no doubt due to an attack of apoplexy. The man was granted relief, and it was suggested that the police should look after a "wizard" who had promised to cure him.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000644/18900412/104/0003
Birmingham Mail - Saturday 12 April 1890

ALLEGED "WITCHCRAFT" IN SUFFOLK.

At an inquest held at Fressingfield on Thursday on the body of a child named Hammond, aged eleven weeks, daughter of labourer, the father and mother stated that they believed the death of the child was due to the witchcraft Mrs. Corbyn, the child's step-grandmother. This woman died a few hours before the child, and stated that the child would not live long after her. The child was taken out in a perambulator, and the father stated that he saw smoke issue from the perambulator, and that the child died upon being taken home, the mother stating that it was hot and dry and smelt of brimstone. The medical evidence went to show that death was due to shock caused by the external application of some irritant, and the jury returning a verdict in accordance with the medical evidence, said there was not sufficient evidence to show the nature of the irritant. George Corbyn said he was of opinion his late wife had the power of a witch, and he always tried to do what she wanted in consequence.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000290/18900412/001/0002
Portsmouth Evening News - Saturday 12 April 1890

In a recent lecture in the Portsmouth Guildhall, an eminent lunacy doctor gave some remarkable illustrations of the extent to which belief in witchcraft exists at present in this country. Another illustration is added to-day in the report of an inquest held in a Suffolk village on the body of a labourer's child. The father and mother attributed the death of the child to the witchcraft of its grandmother, who pre-deceased it by a few hours, stating that the child would follow her. Smoke was then observed issuing from the perambulator in which the child was sitting and the room was filled with the smell of brimstone. Even the poor old lady's husband declared at the inquest that believed his wife was a witch and that he always did what she wanted consequence. This cause and effect will not be lost on wives in general, who have now a simple receipt for keeping their husbands in order and securing strict obedience.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001346/18950427/035/0003
Faversham Times and Mercury and North-East Kent Journal - Saturday 27 April 1895

Black Witchcraft

The spring of 1895 has been disgraced by sporadic cares of witch-mania. White witchcraft has long flourished in those parts of the United Kingdom in which the Celtic race predominates, and in England it is still rampant in what used to be West and North Wales—that is to say, in the present Cornwall and South Wales. We had fondly hoped, however, that black witchcraft was extinct. A distressing story of horrible cruelty comes from Tipperary and upsets our preconceived ideas that questions of black witchcraft were no longer of interest to anyone but to the student of rationalism. A woman, aged 27, the wife of a cooper, has been burnt to death under the supposition that she was a counterfeit or changeling who, being hurt, would disappear, whilst the real woman, held as a hostage by the fairies or good people, would be returned. The episode is one full of interest to the student of folklore, but it does not surprise him. The method adopted has been the one in use from time immemorial. Fire in one form or another has always been regarded as the great restorer and purifier. It is only in the oldest rituals, however, that the fire is actually employed to compel the restoration of the changeling, so that the present instance appears to be a return to the most ancient and savage form of the custom. Children, especially those who had not been christened, were most liable to be changed, a confounding, no doubt, of cause with effect; for at a time when baptism had more than a symbolical meaning only those children were left unbaptised who were too ill or too puny to be taken to church, and it was especially such children who were likely to become marasmic and so to appear as changelings. The treatment recommended for such children was that the mother should heat the oven very hot, a servant or friend being instructed to ask in a loud voice: "Why do you heat the oven so hot?" The mother would then reply: "I am going to burn my child." The question was asked and answered three times. The changeling was then put upon the peel as if to thrust it into the oven, when it was expected that the fairy would rush in and save her offspring, at the same time restoring the original child. In other cases, as in the island of Lewis, the Dessil fire was carried round children night and morning until they were christened, to prevent them being carried off by the fairies. It was easy to detect a changeling apart from its wizened aspect, for it could readily be made to betray its age. The usual method was to boil water over the fire in eggshells, when the changeling would cry out: "Well, I am as old as the Westerwald, but I never saw anything boiled in egg-shells before." Or, as in the Breton folksong, where he sees his foster-mother cooking for ten serving-men in one eggshell, and cannot forbear betraying himself by the remark: "I have seen the egg before it became the white hen and the acorn before the oak; I have seen it acorn and oak, and in Brezal wood, but never aught like this." Old as these stories are, however, it would appear that they are the echoes of a still older time when it was the changeling himself who was put into the pipkin symbolised by the eggshell, and was boiled to death in much the same way as the wretched subject of the recent Irish atrocity.—British Medical Journal.


https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001648/18950416/142/0007

Cork Constitution - Tuesday 16 April 1895

*Also widely syndicated under the heading "A Remarkable Story"*

THE CO. TIPPERARY "FAIRY" BURNING. Mr Robert Day writes from the New Travellers' Club, Piccadilly, London, to the *Pall Mall Gazette*:— The evidence that has been published of this most painful case, in which the unfortunate Bridget Cleary was so cruelly murdered, throws a strange light upon the intensity of the belief that exists among the Irish peasantry in the potency of the power wielded by the "good people," as the fairies are commonly called. In this awful tragedy we see how its actors brought themselves to believe that the original Bridget Boland, wife of James Cleary, had been spirited away, and her place usurped a fairy woman; and this not only impteased the mind of her husband and father, but was shared in by every member of her family, proving how widespread is the belief the traditional fairy folklore and the fairy legends of the country.

Without in any way attempting to excuse the crime, the imaginative and credulous character of the Irish peasantry must not be forgotten, and large allowance must be made for those racial characteristics. I have sometimes listened to the vain boast that the National Schools have either killed the fairies or driven them quite away; but from my experience the faith in their existence, potency, and power is as indelibly impressed upon the Irish mind and grafted upon the Irish peasant now as it ever has been.

A few days ago I was driven for shelter to a farmhouse about midway between Carrigaline and Cork. The occupants were an aged woman and her granddaughter, who after providing me with a chair, entered into conversation that turned upon the all-engrossing subject of the murder on Slievenamon, when the old woman told me the following story that I give as nearly possible in her own words:— "I often heard my mother-in-law tell, sir, of a woman who she knew in the ould times who had — the Lord be praised! — as fine a pair of twins as you would see in a day's walk. They got along beautiful for a while, and what they took did them good, but shortly after a change came across them, and instead of being in their usual spirits, they got cranky and discontented, and cross, and fell away in weight and appearance. And while they got thinner and thinner, bedad, their appetites incraysed, and a loaf of broad would go nowhere between the two of them. And the poor mother — God help her! — was killed intirely in trying do her best to nurse them. One day she wanted to go to the market to sell some ducks, and she asked a little tailor, who worked under the ground floor, to have an eye to the twins in her absence. So when she came back the tailor called her aside, and 'Mrs Moriarty,' ses he, 'I want to tell you 'tisn't your own childer are in it [the cradle] at all, at all.' 'How you know that?' ses she. 'I'll tell you,' says he, 'and, maybe, you'll believe me. When I came up to look after them, I put my head inside the door, and what did I see but the two twins, sitting perched up in the cradle, and they both playing the fiddle, the purtyest music I ever heard in my born days.' So with that she put a sheet over them, that they mightn't see where she was taking them, and down she went to the river, and threw the two *crawhawns* over the bridge into the water, and when they were going from her the langwidge they made use of was so bad, sir, that wouldn't I repate it to you. After that she came home heavy and sorrowful enough, but lo and behould you, what should she see forenenst her in the cradle but her own two handsome childher, crowing and laughing at her, and they both the picture of health and sperits." The old woman fully believed the truth of this story. There is at present living near Ardsollns, in the county of Clare, a farmer's wife who fully believes she was herself changed at nurse, and is in daily expectation of being called for by the good people. Not long since she was driving along the road, and saw in the distance a couple of girls in Connemara-like cloaks, when turning to the boy who was driving, she said, "Bad luck to ye, Pat, fur leaving the ould ass behind with the cross an his back, and bringing out that young cratur, that hasn't a sign of the blessed mark on his shoulders; for if you might have had the ould ass, the sorra a one of the good people would face us."

I could multiply instances from various parts of the South of Ireland of this deep-seated belief. I knew a farmer's family near Mitchelstown, in the county Cork, who left their house for another because it was built in the track of the fairies, and lay between the fairy raths or forts, in consequence of which two members of the family had died, and were supposed have been elf-struck. All this fairy lore is full of romance and interest to the antiquary; but, alas! it also has its dark and weird aspect, in which the innocent babe can be tortured and the mother done to death.


ALso widely syndicated:

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001921/18950417/045/0003
Bognor Regis Observer - Wednesday 17 April 1895

SUPERSTITION IN IRELAND. Few people in England (says a correspondent of the *Westminster Gazette*) realise the hold superstition still has on the mind of the Irish peasant. The sad story of poor Bridget Cleary, burned to death by her husband and father in the presence of several witnesses, will come as a revelation to many. The fell deed was accomplished, it is said, in the full belief that the real Bridget had been carried off by the fairies, and an evil spirit put into possession of her body. The very fact that not one of her relatives or neighbours attended her funeral is significant. They refuse to believe that the real woman was burned, and at the present moment they are watching on the mountains for her return on a white horse sent by the fairies. If they can succeed in cutting the reins of her steed, the true Bridget, so they aver, will be recovered, and the innocence of the men accused of her murder will be triumphantly re-established.

Of course it is rarely indeed that superstition is carried to the terrible length revealed in the present case; but that it underlies the whole existence of the greater portion of the Irish country folk is well known to those who have lived among them. Long and detailed accounts of the exchange by fairies of young children in the cradle are common; those of the "removal" of grown people, scarcely less so.

In some places a strange custom exists of killing a chicken on the doorstep of the cabin where the death of a very young child occurs.

In other parts it is believed that infants dying unbaptised are turned into owls.

To admire a child without adding the saving clause "God bless it" is a shocking offence, and an almost certain proof that you have "overlooked" the infant.

The writer on one occasion narrowly escaped being struck in the face by a woman whose child she had inadvertently called "a sweet little monkey." The breach in our friendship was healed with difficulty after much crossing and muttering of counter-spells by the mother, who asserted stubbornly that a child called by such a name ran the risk of being "possessed."

A favourite cure in county Sligo for sprains or rheumatic affections is the "straining thread" removed from the "straining stone" in the churchyard of Killery—the sufferer or his deputy replacing the string by a new one. Indeed these "straining threads" are often sent for from America by those who have emigrated, and who believe more firmly in the benefits they convey than in all the skill of the American doctors.—[See "History of Sligo," by Woods-Martin.]

The veneration for single trees and solitary thorn bushes is still strong in the Emerald Isle, and is probably a survival of ancient tree-worship.

In the west, on May 1, large bunches of gorse or of marsh-marigolds are hung over every door "to please the good people." Otherwise, the cattle would be "elf-shot," the children bewitched, or any manner of evil might befall the abstainer from this old custom.

A few years ago, when the foot-and-mouth disease was very prevalent in county Dublin, our herd was convinced the malady was caused by the "little folk." Nothing could persuade him to the contrary. However, he assured us he possessed a certain remedy. Pressed to disclose his cure, he showed us an arrowhead. "Shure," said he, "it's the wather in which that has lain I'll be afther givin' the poor bastes, an it's haled (healed) they'll be enthoirely."

Superstition in England, in spite of Board schools and the Thirteen Club, is far from extinct. In Ireland it is still rampant, and as widely spread as the wind-sown seeds on a derelict farm.

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0004634/18950713/012/0004
National Observer - Saturday 13 July 1895

FOLK-LORE IN OPERATION

THE story of the death of Bridget Cleary was brought to an end last week by the conviction of eight persons for various offices ranging from manslaughter to unlawful wounding; and a truly appalling one it is. The published reports of the actual trial are meagre in the extreme, but by combining them with the evidence given before the magistrates the outlines of the story can be made tolerably clear. Bridget was about twenty-seven years old, and the wife of a Tipperary peasant apparently tolerably well to do. She was recently attacked by an illness which in another rank of life would have been called hysteria at most, but its immediate effects do not seem to have been serious. Her husband Richard Cleary and her father considered, however, that she was possessed by fairies, in the sense either that she was a changeling or that her body was in the possession of a fairy while she was detained by other fairies. Whatever the exact nature of their views was they undoubtedly tortured her to death, chiefly by burning. The details of the story may be left to persons who have the heart to treat it as an opportunity for a study of folk-lore. For others who are not inclined to take a purely scientific view it is enough to add that there seems to be no reason to doubt that the eight persons who took part in the proceeding, including particularly the husband and father of the unhappy woman, were on the whole convinced that they were acting in her interests. "You cowardly dirty set, would you rather have her in Kilnagranagh with the fairies than have me have her?' said the husband at the most ghastly crisis in their awful business. 'Mike,' answered the father, 'anything I can do to keep my child and get my child I'll do,' and both of them spoke in perfectly good faith.

It is to be feared that such a story as this may appear to many people a conclusive proof of the innate depravity of the Irish peasant. Such a conclusion is in fact profoundly erroneous. What it really does show is that ignorance produces monstrous fear, such as that of fairies, which in turn produces more monstrous cruelty, such as the torturing of one's wife to death. The ignorance of the Irish peasant is unfortunately the characteristic which is the last to be duly appreciated by the ordinary Englishman. Such a man finds it impossible to believe that any of his fellow countrymen can be as ignorant in the matter of witchcraft as an English judge was two hundred years ago. It may be noted that few of Cleary's fellow peasants are so confident in their ignorance as he was, but there are no doubt many of them who sympathise with him in regarding a rath of the 'old men' as the natural abode of malignant fairies, and who, if the opportunity offered, would encourage him in watching in the rath of Kilnagranah for the return of his wife on a white horse from which he could release her. Such ignorance is lamentable, but it has been banished under happier circumstances from England and there is no reason to believe that it is invincible by ordinary methods of treatment in Ireland. An acute observer of such matters has recorded that superstition such as Cleary's is local in its effects, and is less prevalent among wives who have changed their homes than among men who have grown up in the scenes and among the traditions of their childhood. The ignorance to be found among the Irish peasantry is apt to, meet with much less consideration than it actually deserves, because it is quite consistent with a cleverness and a quickness of mind which may conceal its existence. An Irishman is credited with a desire for Home Rule partly because he finds politics a cheerful form of amusement, combined with a chalice of profit; and he is regarded as a hopeless reprobate because he has not enough knowledge to perceive that most of the political teaching he receives is nonsense and something worse. The belief prevalent throughout Ireland that the government of the country at present constituted is all that prevents gold and coal being mined from the Irish hills is quite of a piece with Cleary's belief in fitiries. How such ignorance can be dissipated is the chief problem for all persons concerned with the inner life of the country to deal with, and the worst possible way of dealing with it is a spirit of impatience or selfrighteous anger. As regards Cleary and his associates there is nothing to complain of in the course that justice has followed. Mr. Justice O'Brien refused to admit evidence as to Cleary's belief in the legends to which his wife fell a victim. Such a belief may have been genuine, but it would have been a disastrous condescension to ignorance to have permitted a contention that it was reasonable; and a mistake as to a matter of fact must be both genuine and reasonable to constitute a good defence. It is on the whole a matter of satisfaction that the judge allowed a charge of manslaughter to be substituted for one of murder. In Cleary's own view he was guilty of an atrocious crime when the legend in which he placed his faith broke down, when his wife died instead of being restored to him. Doubts as to the efficacy of the exorcism lie attempted must have been present to his mind throughout, and at least he knew that he was committing a deadly sin against his religion. It is the first duty of the law to encourage such feelings; and yet the profound ignorance in which he acted separates his case from that of the murderer who sins against the light. The sentences on his accomplices, none of which amounted to more than five years penal servitude, may seem to err on the side of leniency, but in this matter we at least are content to confide in the discretion of the judge. The whole story is as grim an example of the vitality of human error as has been portrayed to the present generation. Its importance consists in the light which, when properly considered, it throws on all the difficulties which go to make up the question of the government of Ireland.




https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000038/18400811/001/0001
Belfast News-Letter - Tuesday 11 August 1840
p1

TO DO

COUNTY OF ARMAGH ASSIZES.

MURDER OF A CHILD BY HIS FATHER.

*John Blakely* was arraigned for the murder of his son, Felix Blakely, a child of 6 or 7 years, at Armagh, on the 1st of March, by strangulation with his hands, and other violence. The prisoner pleaded not guilty. The prisoner being too poor to engage professional assistance, his Lordship assigned Mr. Blacker as his Counsel.

Ann Finlay deposed— I know John Blakely, and knew a woman named Mary Turley. She and prisoner lived together, but she is now dead. They had four or five children—one of them was named Felix; he was youngest but one. Mary Turley died in confinement of the second child after Felix. Only one of children is now alive—a little girl. I did not see Felix for two months before he was found dead. Before his death he and his father lived for a fortnight in William Rainey's, Armagh. I sent the child home to his father, at Rainey's, a fortnight before he (the father) said he took him to a lodging in the conntry. I sent the child home on a Sunday, and saw it alive, for the last time, on the following Tuesday, at Rainey's. The child had had the small-pox, and afterwards a bowel complaint, for 16 weeks before I sent him away—he had not then recovered. He lost the sight of one of his eyes in the small-pox. On the right foot the second toe decayed from the same disease. After the child's death, I saw is body in Armagh infirmary. After I heard the child was dead, I went to prisoner, at James Molholland's, where he was working. I inquired if it was the dead body of Felix that had been brought in? He made no answer for about five or ten minutes. He then said "What could he do with it? (the child). Sure he was tormented with the trouble it gave to every body—no one would take his week's earning to take care of it." "John (said I) had you not (you should not have) done what you have done. I never brought a blush to jour face (craved you) for all the trouble it gave me. I would have begged the world with it to take care of it." (Witness here shed tears.) To Mr. BLACKER— I told prisoner that if he had killed the child, all Ireland could not save him, and that "he had better make his road good." Before the child took the small pox it was a healthy, fine child. I know Mrs. Rainey— she is rather a passionate woman. The report was, that she alleged she had no luck in selling anything in her shop, from the time it came about the house, because it was "bewitched like." The opinion of the country-people is, that a bewitched child is a sickly one which has been left in place of a fine child taken away by the fairies. It was reported that Mrs. Rainey advised the prisoner to take the head off the child, and throw it behind the fire. To a Juror— I am sister to the prisoner.— [Witness here cried bitterly, and there *was a strong sensation in the Court.]

Elizabeth Rainey— I am the wife of William Rainey, and live in Armagh. I keep a huckstry. The prisoner lodged in my house for about a month. He left me on the Wednesday after Shrove Tuesday. When he had been with me for about a fortnight, his sister sent a child to him. It remained there for a fortnight. It slept with him and got its diet with him. It went by the name of Felix. On the Sunday evening before Shrove Tuesday, prisoner borrowed my apron, to put it about the child; and, after he had done so, he took the child and left the house, between seven and eight at night. He did not say where he was going. He returned in the inside of two hours, without the child, but bringing back the apron. I said to him, "John, what did the child say when you were leaving it?"- He replied, that it said nothing. I said, if they give it a fire, and a bit to eat, it would not give them much trouble, and he replied, "Not much." He then asked me for a drink; I told him I had no water except what was hot in the kettle. When prisoner took it away, it wore an old flannel petticoat, with a patch on it,—an old torn sarstet coat,—and an old black calico bib.— I never saw it alive, after that night. I saw the dead body of a child in the Infirmary, nearly five weeks afterwards. I think it was that of Felix Blakely— Dr Colvan, Ann Finlay (last witness), and a Mrs. Magill, were present. The prisoner remained in my house till the Wednesday after he took the child away. To Mr. BLACKER— I live in Lower Irish-street, Armagh. I am married, and have 5 children, from 3 to 15 years of age. The child was bare and hungry-looking; it had had the small-pox, and had got bad care in the disease. It had not the appearance of a child of seven years, being spent and sickly. It was old-fashioned enough, however, both in look and conversation. It used to sit up on its "bunkers" at the fire, like an old man. It did not appear an idiot or a "natural." When the child had been a week in my house, I began to wish its father would provide another lodging for it. He said it was getting care enough; but that he had *a very good place for it*. I asked where the place was. He replied, "in Mick Duffy's, in Bannbrook," or "in the Shambles," I forget which. After I shut my shop of nights, I sometimes have a crack with my husband and a neighbour. We don't tell old stories, about fairies, and so on—how should I know anything about fairies? (laughter.) I never said any thing to prisoner about fairies,— I merely said to him, that his child was "not *right*-looking," and that it should be with me no longer; if it had had good clothes, it would have been like other children. I never called it a witch. I heard my children say, that, when it was up stairs, it used to sing foolish little songs, and that it played little tricks among the ashes, and was "bringing *wee things* (fairies) about the fire." I don't know what "wee things," or "wee people," are. I never saw the deceased child do more than play a little trick, as if to frighten the others. I often asked the prisoner to be allowed to give the child a halfpenny-worth of bread in the day, but he did not say he would permit me. I never told him the child would come to no good; but that if it got care it might thrive. He complained of it, and asked what he would do with it; and I told him he should let his sister keep it, and give her a shilling a-week for doing so. I swear, that I never said to hum, that I would take off its head, and throw it behind the fire. Prisoner said, that his sister should never get it. He had given the child its supper, before he rolled it up in my apron.

Abigail Magill—I lodged in Rainey's house, on the night that prisoner took the child away. After he returned, he came to my room, with a candle in his left hand, and asked for a drink of water. I told him where to get it, and he lifted two tinfulls with his right hand, which trembled in the act. I desired him to take a drink to the child. He said he left it in the country. I never saw the child alive, after that; but I saw its body in the Infirmary, after the doctors had sent for me. Before it died, there was a pearl on the right eye, and two of the toes had grown together in the small-pox. To Sir T. STAPLES— I saw the united toes of the dead body, and often while it was alive. (Witness described the clothes found on the body, and said she was sure they were the same as the child had worn when alive.) To Mr. BLACKER— When the prisoner told me he had left the child in the country, I had suspicions about it. I never heard quarrelling between Mrs. Rainey and prisoner, about the child. I didn't pay any heed to the idle stories of peeple who said the child was "so and so" (a changeling).

Robert Woods— I know Miss Lodge's grounds, about a mile from this town, I was there on 2d April, about eleven o'clock. In the gripe of a ditch, I observed the dead body of a child. It was wrapped in old clothes, and covered with some tufts of grass and fog. I went to Mr. Pooler, Miss Lodge's gardener, and told the circumstances. I next went to Rainey's, Steward to Miss Lodge. A man of Rainey's and I went to the ditch. In the course of the day an inquest was held on the body. Dr. Colvan attended. I saw the body removed from the ditch. There was an old, dirty cloth wrapped round the head, old flannel rolled round the body, and a black cloth round its neck. I heard that the body and clothes were removed to the Infirmary.

Joseph Barbour— I carried the dead body of a child from Miss Lodge's side of Mr. Dobbin's dam, to the Infirmary, and delivered it to the doctors.

John Colvan, Esq.—I am a physician and surgeon. On the 2d April last, I saw a dead body in Miss Lodge's grounds. The body was that of a child, of probably five or six years. I re-examinied the bodv at the Infirmary. It had the appearance of having been dead for a considerable time. Putrefaction had commenced on the abdomen. It was a cold, dry time of the year, and the place where the body was found was a cool one. It might, therefore, have lain for a longer time than we could reasonably suppose. I named eight or ten days at the time of the inquest, as I was pressed for an opinion, but I thought it might have been dead much longer. My opinion is, that the child's death was occasioned by external violence. There was a large bruise betwixt the eyes, and one much larger on the right side of the throat. The tongue protruded partially from between the lips and teeth. From these marks, and from the apparent weak state of the child, I not only concluded that its death had been a violent one, but I was even led to form an opinion as to the mode of the death. The skeleton was that of an emaciated child; and, apparently, a little violence would have occasioned death. The wounds appeared to have been inflicted by some hard blunt substance. They might have been caused by a fall or a blow. I observed, on the right side of the head, the cicatrix of a large ulcer, which had denuded the bone.— The right eye was completely blind, from a disease we term stapholema, or projecting humour, and the-left eye was also injured from opacities of the cornea. Two of the toes on the right foot had run together, in healing from small-pox. It was I and an apprentice of mine, Mr. Davison, who lifted the body out of the ditch, and undressed it on the field. The clothes on the upper part seemed as if pinned round it; but those on the lower part were put on as they had been worn. To Mr. BLACKER— The body lay in the ditch with the face up. I did not find internal marks to occasion death. If the child had been exposed to the inclemency of the air, for a short time, it would probably have died, after the infliction of the injuries. The wound betwixt the eyes was not a superficial one. The blood was effused into all the structures down to the bone, which was injured, but not broken. In the other wounds, the blood was also effused into all the structures. I thought the wounds the only visible cause of death.

John Reavoy— I live in Portadown. In April last, I heard of a man's having killed a child at Armagh. I saw a person answering the description passing through Portadown, and gave information to the Captain of the Police, who ordered a party of his men to go with me. The man I refer to was the prisoner. When he saw us, he escaped into Mr. Shillington's timber, but was captured on the Lurgan road. He told Capt. Locke, that he lived in High street, Newry. I saw him again in the Police barrack. Capt. Locke warned him not to say any thing that might commit himself. My brother and I, Mick Cromey, and Corporal Daly, of the Police, were present with him in the barrack, afterwards. Mick Cromey and my brother asked him why he had killed the child. We could not get him stopped from making declaration of the facts. He gave himself two or three names— one of which was Turley. He also said he had been bred at Sheepbridge.

John Wilson, Sub-Constable— It was I who arrested the prisoner. I found him lying in a Mr. Boyd's garden, at the end of Portadown, on 27th April. I told him there was a charge against him, and asked him where he lived. He said, in Newry, or its neighbourhood. He denied that he ever lived at Armagh.

Mr. BLACKER, for the defence, argued, that the evidence did not bear out the second count of the indictment, alleging strangulation as the cause of death; and quoted from Sir Gregory Lewin's Reports, in support of his argument. He also submitted, as to the first count, charging the death as occasioned by throwing the deceased down on the ground, &c., thereby giving him a mortal wound, that it did not appear, in the evidence of the surgeon, whether the mortal wound was occasioned by a blow, or by a fall on the ground; and he referred to a precedent given in the work already referred to, to shew, that this would not be sufficient to sustain the count.

Dr. Covan, recalled— My opinion as to the cause of death is this, that if life was lingering, after the violence, it may have been fniskhed or accelerated by the inclemency of the weather.

The witness's depositions were then read, where it appeared that he had alleged exposure to the inclemency of the weather as one of the causes of death.

Dr. Colvall— to the Court— The tongue of the deceased protruded, which indicated suffocation— not strangulation. Strangulation is considered as effected by placing a substance tightly round the neek. Suffocation may be caused by pressing the hand against the throat, and squeezing the wind-pipe. Choking is properly the stopping of the oesophagus, by the presence of some extraneous substance.

Sir T. STAPLES quoted from *5 Carrington and Paine*, 121, as reported in *Roscoe on Evidence*, 650, to show the sufficiency of the evidence to sustain the indictment, so far as regarded the acceptation and admitted meaning of the terms choking ard strangulation.

Mr. HANNA, Q.C. cited from *Roscoe*, 651, to a similar effect.

The Court held the precedents good, but did not wish to preclude the prisoner the benefit of a future consideration of the point raised by his Counsel.

Mr. BLACKER then addressed the jury briefly on the part of the prisoner.

No witness were called for the defence.

His Lordship began his charge to the jury, and his recapitulation of the evidence, at five minutes past three o'clock, and concluded at a quarter past four. At five minutes to five the Jury returned to Court with a verdict of— guilty.

The prisoner did not evince any particular concern when the verdict was announced. He preserved a dogged, listless air during the whole trial; and on one or two occasions we caught him smiling, while chatting with a policeman and the jailers in the dock.— *Whig.*

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001432/18850815/161/0010
West Somerset Free Press - Saturday 15 August 1885
p10
FAIRY CHANGELINGS.

I have been told, says the Rev. John O'Hanlon, writing in 1865, of a circumstance occuring—one, too, in which the names of parties and places were mentioned— regarding a respectable farmer's family, on whom a changeling had been imposed, and in the following manner. A beautiful and healthy infant, sleeping with its mother, was thought to have been rudely snatched from her arms during the night; for, with the morning's dawn, a deformed and withered-looking old creature appeared instead. The child was doubtless attacked with some paralytic disease, which thus had suddenly changed its appearance. However, the parents, with all their friends and neighbours, were persuaded the child had been carried off to fairyland, whilst a fairy had been left to supply its place. The poor mother found this weakling, whom she still continued suckling, waste away her own strength, and she seemed last falling into decline. The child became remarkably peevish, would not look on "man nor mortal," and its piercing screams sounded so unearthly, that it was agreed all sides the services of fairy-woman would be required to recover the lost one. This matter was arranged with the greatest secrecy, lest it should come to the knowledge of the poor deformed creature, whose flesh became completely shrivelled and whose limbs had shrunk to the most attenuated dimensions. With her usual exorcisms and charms the fairy-woman employed put the supposed changeling a shovel, and afterwards left him on the dung-heap before the farmhouse offices, whilst he offered every resistance possible, and screamed with terrific cries. To the great delight of the mother and her friends, when going outside expecting the return of their lost darling, it lay on the same unsavoury dunghill—ruddy, plump, and smiling sweetly as of yore, the old man having altogether disappeared. So far as my recollection this story serves me, the child lived some time afterwards, yet died before it had attained the age of reason.— *The Gentleman's Magazine Library; English Tradition Lore.*


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001599/19130411/047/0003
Hendon & Finchley Times - Friday 11 April 1913
p3
THE TALE OF CHANGELING.

Here is story told by Jane Propert, of Kington, in the hop-yard at Weobly in September, 1908. Jane believed the story, because she had it from "a woman who knew was true." It is taken from "The Folk-Lore of Herefordshire," by Ella Mary Leather (Sidgwick and Jackson):

A woman had a baby that never grew; it was always hungry, and never satisfied, but lay in its cradle year after year, never walking, and nothing seemed to do it good. Its face was hairy and strange-looking. One day the woman's elder son, a soldier, came home from the war, and was surprised to see his brother still in the cradle. But when he looked in he said, "That's not my brother, mother." "It is, indeed," said his mother. "We'll see about that," he said. So he obtained first a fresh egg and blew out the contents, filling the shell with malt and hops. Then he began to brew over the fire. At this a laugh came from the cradle. "I am old, old, ever old," said the changeling, "but I never saw a soldier brewing beer in an eggshell before!" Then he gave a terrible shriek, for the soldier went for him with whip, chasing him round and round the room what had never left his cradle. At last he vanished through the door, and when the soldier went out after him he met on the threshold his long-lost brother. He was man of twenty-four years of age, fine and healthy. The fairies had kept him in a beautiful place under the rocks, and fed him on the best of everything. He should never be as well off again, he said, but when his mother called he had to come home."

---
https://newspapers.library.wales/view/3280241/3280244/30/changeling%20assizes
Evening Express
26th October 1898
p3
et al; widely published advert

THE CHILD LOOKS LIKE A CHANGELING.

It is quite shrunk and shrivelled; its eyes seem dim; its skin is clammy; it wails rather than cries. And it was such a bonny baby a few weeks back. What can have come over it? In a case like this you may be quite sure that the mischief lies in its food. Give it Horlick's Malted Milk, and you will soon find that it is not a changeling, but your own bonny baby once more. Horlick s Malted Milk is the best food for children in health and sickness. It has saved many little lives when they seemed past all medical aid. All like it, all thrive on it. Your chemist will supply it. Price 1s. 6d., 2s. 6d., and 11s. Sample free on application to Horlick and Co., 34, Farringdon-road, London, E.C. Send for "Freddy's Dairy," post free.


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0002957/18840528/043/0004
Kilkenny Moderator - Wednesday 28 May 1884
p4
"The Fairies" in Clonmel.

On Saturday last two women named Anastatia Rourke and Ellen Cummins were brought from the gaol of Clonmel to the town hall, in custody, and were charged before the Mayor, Captain Morton, and Alderman Cantwell, with having on the 28th April last, wilfully and unlawfully burned John Dillon, aged three years, (committed to their care to noise) by placing him naked on a hot shovel, in the belief that he was an old man or a fairy left by the "good people" as a substitute for the real child, whom they had taken from its mother. It appeared in the course of the case that, as the child was pining, they believed, according to the barbarous superstition of some of the peasantry, that it was a fairy child which had become substituted for the previous healthy one; and measures were taken accordingly for dealing with the changeling by placing it on a red hot shovel. The evidence fully sustained the charge against Anastatia Bourke, who was sentenced to a weeks' imprisonment. The Mayor, in passing sentence, said that she was already a month in gaol, and the magistrates were of opinion an additional week's imprisonment would be sufficient to satisfy the ends of justice. It was a case of gross ignorance and gross superstition.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001485/18840521/024/0004
St James's Gazette - Wednesday 21 May 1884
p4

Nobody who knows Ireland will be much surprised at the circumstance that two women of Clonmel have been arrested on the charge of cruelly ill-treating child which they fancied was a changeling left by the fairies in place of the original child. Even in Scotland, where a tolerably stringent "Education Act" was passed as early as the year 1696, the fairy superstition survived far into the second half of the eighteenth century, if not later. Pennant, in his well-known Tour (published 1771-75) tells a story of a Breadalbane peasant who imagined that he was forcibly drawn into the society of the elfish folk. With them were mingled a crowd of men and women, many of whom he knew to have been dead for years. They did him no harm, except that a "female sprite" seems to have amused herself by tying his hair in double knots and otherwise making fun of him, "But it is incredible," adds Pennant, "the mischief these *agri somnia* did in the neighbourhood. The friends and neighbours of the deceased whom the old dreamer had named were in the utmost anxiety at finding them in such bad company in the other world; the almost extinct belief of the old idle tales began to gain ground, and the good minister will have many a weary discourse and exhortation before he can eradicate the absurd ideas this idle story has revived." Meanwhile the case of Ellen Cushion and Anastasia Rourke offers additional evidence—if any were needed —of the propriety of applying the same political measure to Tipperary as to Middlesex and Surrey.

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001444/18840521/030/0004
Weston-super-Mare Gazette, and General Advertiser
Wednesday 21 May 1884
p4

SUPERSTITION IN IRELAND.

Ellen Cushion and Anastatia Rourke were arrested at Clonmel on Saturday charged with cruelly illtreating a child three years old, named Philip Dillon. The prisoners were taken before the mayor, when evidence was given showing an extraordinary survival of superstitious belief. It appeared that the neighbours fancied that the child, which had not the use of its limbs, was a changeling left by the fairies in exchange for the original child. While the mother was absent the prisoners entered her house and placed the child naked on a hot shovel, under the impression that this would break the charm. The child was severely burned, and is in precarious condition. The prisoners were remanded. They were hooted by the crowd. 

[Article was widely syndicated, verbatim]

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001610/18840523/095/0005
Jarrow Express - Friday 23 May 1884
p5
We commend Ellen Cusheon and Anastasia Rourke to the attention of the Society for the Confinement of Lunatics. At Clonmel, it appears, there dwells little boy named Philip Dillon. It seems the neighbours fancied that the child, which had not the use of its limbs, was a changeling left by the fairies in exchange for the original child while the mother was absent. The prisoners entered the mother's house, and placed the child naked on a hot shovel, under the impression that this would break the charm. The poor little thing was severely burnt, and is in a precarious condition. We are thankful that we do not reside Clonmel.

----
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000576/19060829/129/0007
Aberdeen Press and Journal - Wednesday 29 August 1906
p7
An Irish Superstition.—

A superstition, that to this day finds great credence among the peasantry Ireland, is that lighted candle placed in dead man's hand wili not be seen by any but those whom it is used; and that if a candle in a dead hand be introduced into a house, it will prevent those who may asleep within the house from waking. Within recent years a party of moonlighters. under the influence of this superstition, attacked the house of a farmer, lighting their way with a candle whose candlestick was man's hand. Unfortunately for the credit the creed, the inmates were alarmed and their assailants fled, leaving their dead hand behind them.

--

https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000433/18260728/047/0004
Dublin Evening Mail - Friday 28 July 1826
p4
TRALEE ASSIZES. CHILD MURDER —HORRIBLE SUPERSTITION

*Ann Roche*, an old woman of very advanced age, was indicted for the murder of Michael Leahy, a young child, by drowning him in the Flesk. This case turned out to be a homicide committed under the delusion of the grossest superstition. The child, though four years old, could neither stand, walk, or speak— *it was thought to be Fairy-struck* —and the grand-mother ordered the prisoner and one of the witnesses, Mary Clifford, to bathe the child every morning, in that pool of the river Flesk, where the boundaries of three farms met; they had bathed it for three mornings running, and on the last morning the prisoner kept the child longer under the water than usual, when her companion (the witness, Mary Clifford) said to the prisoner, "how can you hope to ever see God after this," to which the prisoner replied, "that the sin was on the grandmother and not on her." — Upon cross-examination, the witness said it was not done with intent kill the child, but to cure it— *to put the Fairy out of it*.

The Policeman, who apprehended her, on charging her with drowning the child, she said it was no matter if it had died four years ago.

Baron Pennefather said, that he thought it was a case of suspicion, and required to be thoroughly examined into, yet the Jury would not be safe in convicting the prisoner of murder, however strong their suspicions might be. Verdict— Not Guilty.



TO DO  - Washer at the Ford, Fiona Macleod, death symbol? https://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/oi/authority.20110803121134488 Banshee?

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000876/18260620/040/0004
Southern Reporter and Cork Commercial Courier - Tuesday 20 June 1826
p4
MYSTERIOUS CHARGE OF MURDER. Tralee, Saturday, June 17.— An Inquest was held on Wednesday last, at Muckruss Abbey, near Killarney, before Eusebius M'Gillycuddy, Esq. one of the Coroners for this County, (assisted the Hon Thomas Brown, the Rev. A. Hyde, and George Cashell, Esqrs.. Magistrates) on the body of Michael Kelliher, a child of the age of between four and five years (a paralytic, helpless and disabled ricketty cripple) who, it is alleged, was murdered by drowning in the river Flesk, near that town on Monday last. The accounts which have reached us of this affair are really horrible. There are three women at present confined in our County Gaol, charged on the verdict of the Coroner's Jury, with _"Wilful Murder."_ Their names are Anne Roche, Honora Leahy, and Mary Clifford. *Honora Leahy* was the grandmother of the unfortunate deceased child, who, it is said, fell a sacrifice and murderous ignorance and superstition, and she has, for some years past, been the sole support that poor boy, and some other children of a deceased daughter, who were left quite destitute. We have heard it said that Honora Leahy, heretofore, always maintained good character; —so much has not been said for *Nance Roche*, who is described as superannuated, and having, *of necessity*, retired from the hustle and frail vanities of this wicked world, now claims a mysterious intimacy with certain *busy things, respectfully* denominated, *Good People* —hints at her profound knowledge and powerful influence on their supernatural agency, and is deeply skilled in every *Fairy Herb and Nostrum*. The wretched cripple was her patient, and she stands charged with effectually curing him of all the evils of this life. Mary Clifford who was the servant maid of Honora Leahy—has, as she asserts been impelled by conscientious visitings of remorse, to become an approver, and has accused her mistress and the *Doctress* with Wilful murder. It is a tale of horror, disgusting and appalling to human reason.—The following was the verdict of the Coroner's Jury:—

"We find that the deceased, Michael Kelliher, came by his death in consequence of drowning in the River Monday, the 1th of June, 1826, by Nance Roche, and that Honora Leahy, the child's grandmother, and Mary Clifford, were accessary to the same."— *Tralee Herald.*


---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001287/18260731/036/0004
Belfast Commercial Chronicle - Monday 31 July 1826
p4
TRALEE ASSIZES

Child Murder — Superstition.

Ann Roche, an old woman of very advanced age, was indicted for the murder of Michael Leahy, a young child, drowning him in the Flesk. This case, which at first assumed a serious aspect, from the meaning imputed to words spoken by the prisoner, "that the sin of the child's death was on the grand-mother, and not on the prisoner," turned out to be a homicide committed under the delusion of the grossest superstition. The child, though four years old, could neither stand, walk, nor speak —*it was thought to be Fairy-struck*— the grand-mother ordered the prisoner and one of the witnesses, Mary Clifford, to bathe the child every morning, in that pool of the river Flesk, where the boundaries of three farms met; they had so bathed it for three mornings running, and on the last morning the prisoner kept the child longer under the water than usual, when her companion (the witness, Mary Clifford) said to the prisoner, "how can you hope ever to see God after this?" to which the prisoner replied, "that the sin was on the grandmother and not on her." Upon cross-examination, the witness said it was not done with intent to kill the child, but to cure it— "to put the Fairy out of it."

---



---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000174/18311027/029/0003
Morning Post - Thursday 27 October 1831
p3

MANX SUPERSTITIONS

Another instance they gave me to prove the reality of fairies was of a fiddler, who, having agreed with a person, who was a stranger, for so much money, to play to some company he should bring him to, all the twelve days of Christmas, and received earnest for it, saw his new master vanish into the earth the moment he had made the bargain. Nothing could be more terrified than was the poor fiddler. He found he had entered himself into the devil's service, and looked on himself as already damned; but having recourse to a Clergyman he received some hope: he ordered him, however, as he had taken earnest, to go when he should be called; but that, whatever tunes should he called for, to play none but psalms. On the day appointed the same person appeared, with whom he went, though with what inward reluctance tis easy to guess; but punctually obeying the Minister's directions, the company to whom he played were so angry that they all vanished at once. leaving him at the top of a high hill, and so bruised and hurt, though he was not sensible when or from what hand he received the blows, that he got not home without the utmost difficulty. — The old story of infants being changed in their cradles is here in such credit that mothers are in continual terror at the thoughts of it. I was prevailed upon myself to go and see a child who they told me was one of these changelings; and, indeed, must own was not a little surprised as well as shocked at the sight; nothing uuder heaven could have a more beautiful face; but though between five and six years old, and seemingly healthy, he was so far from being able to walk or stand, that he could not so much as move any one joint; his limbs were vastly long for his age, but smaller than an infant's of six months; his complexion was perfectly delicate, and he had the finest hair in the world; he never spoke nor cried, ate scarce any thing, and was very seldom seen to smile; but if any one called him a fairy-elf he would frown and fix his eyes so earnestly on those who said it as if he would look them through. His mother, or at least his supposed mother, being very poor, frequently went out a charing, and left him a whole day together; the neighbours, out of curiosity, have often looked in at the window to see how he behaved when alone; which, whenever they did, they were sure to find him laughing, and in the utmost delight. This made them judge that he was not without company more pleasing to him than any mortals could be; and what made this conjecture seem the more reasonable was, that if he were left ever so dirty, the woman, at her return, saw him with a clean face, and his hair combed with the utmost exactness and nicety. — (*Notes to the New Edition of Peveril the Peak.*)

---

---
https://www.britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001644/18420416/001/0001
Roscommon & Leitrim Gazette - Saturday 16 April 1842
p1

Sketches of Superstitions
Popular Fancies of the Irish
(From Chamber's Edinburgh Journal)

Ireland has long teemed with superstitions of the wildest and most imaginative cast. Indeed, up to the present day, civilisation has been more ineffective in rooting them out from that country than from any other that can pretend to a place among the de-barbarised regions of the earth. In the western and south-western provinces of the island, in particular, the people still cling tenaciously the superstitions of their forefathers; and of this fact not only the narratives of tourists, but the records of justiciary courts, afford many recent proofs. Deaths are yet not unfrequently occasioned by children being dipped in rivers and sainted wells to cure them of being *fairy stricken*; and young women labouring under severe puerperal illness are often allowed to perish from inattention, because their friends regard them changelings, the real parties being carried off, according to the general belief, to serve as nurses *infant fairies*. Ireland being still in this condition, it is obvious that this inquirer into the superstitions of that island must enjoy great advantage over those who but rake up the ashes, it were, of similar follies, in places where they have been long extinct. Mr. T. Crofton Croker has indeed shown this to be the case, most convincingly, in his three entertaining volumes on the "Fairy Legends and Traditions" of his native land. To this work, the most ample existing repertory of knowledge on the subject, and the essay Dr. Grimm of Gottingen, printed along with with it, we are happy to acknowledge large obligations in drawing the following account of the superstitions of Ireland.

In addition to that ubiquitous supernatural race, entitled *good people*, *elves*, or *fairies* to whom the same characters of diminutive stature, beauty of person, social habits, and mixed qualities of disposition, are every where ascribed, the Irish have long put faith in the existence of various other supernatural tribes, of which traces are to be found in different countries, but which have characters peculiarly well-marked in the Green Isle. The most prominent of these spirits are the *cluricaune*, the *banshee*, the *phooka*, the *merrow*, the *dullahon*, and the *fir-derrig*. Before the strange habits ascribed to these imaginary beings are adverted to, it may be observed regarding the elves, that the Irish, like most other nations, believe in the existence of two kinds, good and evil. The good elf or fairy is called *shefro*, *she* or *shighe* being the root of the term, as is partly shown by the word ban*she*. Even the shefros have dark shades in their character; as, though they sometimes confer benefits on mortals, they steal children and nursingwomen, and all their beauty and the splendour of their dwellings are regarded illusory, they being really old and ugly, and their palaces hovels.— But the worse species of elf, styled in Irish the *leprachan**, is all evil together‚—in short, a malicious demon. Ireland is rife with stories of the mischiefs brought by the leprachan on poor men, their crops, cattle, and families.

The *cluricaune* unlike the elf, is altogether solitary being. He presents, when seen, the comical appearance of a little old man, with a peagreen coat adotned by large buttons, broad shoebuckles, and cocked hat of the old French cut. He is perpetually found smoking and drinking, and his favourite resting position is on the top of cask in some well-filled cellar. He seldom exhibits himself wilfully, but is sometimes caught unexpectedly by the eyes of mortals, and on such occasions, people who are knowing in those matters endeavour to seize him, for he has properties which makes him most valuable servant. The cluricaune has a purse about him containing *one shilling*, and if any one can get hold of that purse and coin, gets treasure indeed, for, when paid away, the shilling always returns to the purse. But the cluricaune is commonly too old, or too tricky, for his captors. He carries about with him a double of the magic purse, and when people think they have the real shilling, behold they have only current coin of the realm, which, goodness knows, is very unapt return if once sent away! Then the tricksy spirit will strive make his captor turn his head to look at something or other and if this is once done, by the laws of cluricaune existence, the spirit can make himself invisible, and nothing will be heard more of him, but his mocking laugh of triumph at his escape. Again, if he is compelled to point out where treasures lie, he urges his mortal captor to mark the place with a stone, or some such thing. If this be done, the vainly triumphing mortal, when he returns with his spade to the place, will find a dozen marks instead of one, and will again get nothing for his pains but the pleasure of hearing the mocking "ha! ha!" of the cluricaune.

Though a valuable servant, if rightly managed the cluricaune is very bad master. Like the  *nis* of Germany, he sometimes attaches himself to a particular family, and domineers over them in the most intolerable way, being ejectible neither by bell, book, nor candle, coaxing, nor abuse. In some of the former sketches upon this subject, it was mentioned that an Irish gentleman, who was troubled with a familiar, thought to get rid of it by removal to another house, but was shocked, on the morning of the flitting, to hear a voice exclaim from the bung-hole of cask, on one of the loaded carts, "Here we go, master! here we go — all together!" What! are you there too then we may as well stay where we are. Unpack the carts." The cluricaune was the familiar spirit who had the honour to figure on this occasion, as he has done many similar ones, according to the creed of Ireland.

The banshee is also a spirit which attaches itself to particular families, but of a very different character from the cluricaune. The banshee is not a spirit of fun and trickery, but of gloom and death. *Bean-shighe*, signifying *she-fairy*, is understood to be the uncorrupted form the term.— This spirit attends on some particular house, ...

[THIS IS A LONG ARTICLE]




https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000086/18900906/002/0001
Newcastle Courant - Saturday 06 September 1890

CURIOUS CREEDS.
(Specially Contributed.)

FAIRIES.

An Irish servant of mine, a native of Galway, gave me the following relation:-Her father was a blacksmith, and for his many acts of benevolence to benighted travellers became a great favourite with the fairies, who paid him many visits. It was customary for the fairies to visit his forge at night, after the family had retired to rest, and here go to work in such right good earnest, as to complete, on all occasions, the work which had been left overnight unfinished. The family were on these occasions awoke from their slumber by the vigorous puffing of bellows, and hammering on anvil, consequent on these industrious habits of the fairies, and it was an invariable role for the fairies to replace all the tools they they had used during the night; and moreover, if the smithy had been left in confusion the previous evening, the "good people" always arranged it, swept the floor, and restored everything to order before the morning. I never could glean from her any detailed instances of the labour accomplished in this way, or indeed anything which might aid in the formation of an estimate of the relative skill of the fairies in manual labour; and I must confess that on these subjects I never question too closely - the reader will know why.

On one occasion, one of the family happening to be unwell, the father went back to the smithy at midight for some medicine that had been left there on the shelf, and put the "good people" to flight just as they had begun their industrial orgies. To disrupt the fairies is at any timer a perilous thing, and so it proved to him—for a fat pig died the following day, little Tike had the measles too after, and no end of misfortune followed. In addition to this occult revenge, the initates of the house were kept awake several nights by a noise similar to that which would be produced by peas being pelted at the windows. The statement was made with an earnestness of manner which betrayed a faith without scruple.— *Shirley Hibbert in Choice Notes.*

https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001598/18940213/019/0001
Mid Sussex Times - Tuesday 13 February 1894

"IRISH FOLK AND FAIRY LORE."

Of Irish politics most people know enough and to spare, but of the Irish people, their racial peculiarities and beliefs, considerable ignorance exists. Yet the latter are well worth studying, and the lecture by Mr. H. Ringwoog Peach (late of Trinity College, Dublin), on "Irish Folk and Fairy Lore," at the Schoolroom, Ditchling, on Friday, threw a flood of light on a little known subject. The address was illustrated by song and story, the vocalists being the Lecturer and Miss Maud Bond, who were accompanied on the piano by Miss West. The platform was tastefully decorated with fans and palms kindly lent by Mrs. Turner. Dr. Stokes, who presided over a fairly good attendance, having briefly introduced the Lecturer, Mr. Peach commenced his address by some early reminiscences of tales which he had heard from an Irishman named Tim Houlahan. No tourist would ever obtain a knowledge of the folk lore of the "distresshful country," because it was necessary to live with the Irish, and make friends with then on their own hearths to become acquainted with their stories. The Celtic story-teller possessed a marvellous memory, and could learn almost anything rote, and the precision with which he would afterwards recite it was simply amusing. Proceeding, the Lecturer remarked that the Irish race remained practically unchanged, for as a matter of fact aliens in Ireland soon became more Irish than the Irish themselves. The derivation of the word "Fairy" was then passed in review, attention being called to its resemblance to "Peri," and the speaker alluded to the good work being accomplished by the Parisian folk-lore journal *Melusine*. Allusion waa made to the widespread veneration felt for sacred trees, and it waa stated that the Celtic people agreed in offering homage to the oak. Mr. Peach next turned to the question of fairies, and explained their mythical origin. One version was to the effect that when our first parents resided in the Garden of Eden before the Fall, the Deity came to visit Adam and Eve, and asked them to bring their children before Him. This was done, and Eve was then asked if she had no others. She answered the negative, but the truth was that when called on to produce her offspring she had not finished washing them all, and, being ashamed to let the Deity see them dirty, kept a portion behind. For this piece of deceit Eve was admonished, and told that those who man hid from God, God would hide from man. The result was that the unwashed children became from that time invisible, and took up their abode in rocks and holes. From these children the elves were descended, while the human race are the offspring of the washed. The fairy rings were then touched upon, the Lecturer quoting Mark Twain on the point. A belief in fairies was characteristic of the truo Irishman. Peasant proprietorship. Home Rule, and even an Irish Republic would not eradicate that belief; it would live and thrive in spite of all. Nine-tenths of the Irishman's religion was deeply rooted in superstition, and he considered that to the inhabitant of the Emerald Isle there was something very soothing in the belief that sympathetic spirits existed in the air around. But notwithstanding their frequent kindly acts the fairies were capricious, and "Pat" or "Biddy" would never speak of the "good people" except with the deepest consideration. The fairies were supposed to be great lovers of music, and many a traditional Irish air was supposed to be nothing less than a coarse human imitation of fairy song. They were divided into two classes, the trooping and the solitary, the distinction being that the first-named variety were dressed in green, while the latter were attired in red. The Cluricaune of County Cork was a rather unpleasant sort of fairy, and was accredited with sottish and uncleanly habits. His characteristic traits excited little sympathy or regard, but as he was supposed to bo acquainted with the whereabouts of hidden treasure, reckless natives occasionally tried to get information from him, generally coming off second best. A Banshee was apparently a sprite of more melancholy character, for the Lecturer stated that it is sometimes seen, but more often heard, wailing on the death of a member of any of the old Irish families. The Irish also possess another species termed the Puca, the name much resembling the Puck of Shakespeare's *Midsummer Night's Dream*. The Puca had the singular power of changing its form at will, a circumstance naturally puzzling to the natives. Mr. Peach then came to the second part of his programme, and read with considerable effect several witty tales illustrative of Fairy Lore. They included "The Legend of Knockgrafton," "The Brewery of Egg-Shells," "Paudeen O'Kelly and the Weasel," and "Daniel O'Rourke." The lecture was interspersed with old Irish songs, Mr. Peach rendering "The Snowy-Breasted Pearl" and "Mo caílin deas cruidthe na m-bo," and Miss Maud Bond singing "The Song of Fionnuala" and "The Origin of the Harp," her fine vocalisation of the latter securing an encore, which was responded to with "Love's Young Dream." The proceeds of the lecture, which was arranged by Mrs. Turner, will be devoted to the Soup and Coal Fund.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0001730/18960613/040/0002
Evening Herald (Dublin) - Saturday 13 June 1896

IRISH SUPERSTITIONS.

(Special to the Herald)

I wonder how many people are affected by the superstition of the magpie. "One for sorrow, two for joy," etc. I have known some friends, men in very good positions too, and who possess reputations for sound sense, and who, nevertheless would never think of passing a magpie without touching their hats to him, and I have heard that this was an invariable practice of the late Isaac Butt. I confess that I myself was rather a slave to this superstition some years ago, and even mow I would rather any day see two magpies than one. The first thing that weakened my faith in it, if I may so speak, was when, some years ago, I was travelling in the North of Ireland, and a single magpie crossed the road, and the driver made some remark about it. I felt myself rather uncomfortable, and I asked him whether he thought the single magpie was a harbinger of bad luck. He laughed at my query, and expressed his surprise that "a knowledgeable" man like myself would give in to such things. I found, however, before the drive came to an end that my sceptical driver had a weakness of his own. A weasel happened to cross the road. "We are sure to have some bad luck now," anyway, said the driver, and sure enough the harness broke shortly after, and the horse came down, pitching myself and driver out on the road, but fortunately doing no other injury. We picked ourselves up, and succeeding in borrowing some harness from a farmer that lived close to the of the accident, we managed to get to our destination all right. I was persuaded that it was the magpie that was the cause of the trouble, while my friend, the driver, insisted that it was the devil of a weasel was to blame, and I confess that when that night I was thinking over the matter I began to wonder whether the carman or myself was the bigger fool, and, as I have said, from that out my faith in the magpie as an omen was considerably weakened.

I fancy that the National Schools will in the end kill off most of these superstitions, though there is that in human nature which will always prompt most of us to do our refrain from doing a thing for "good luck." I have heard of one very hard-headed man who confessed that he always turned his money when he saw the new moon, for it had been impressed on him when he was young that if he did he'd never want for cash. He was a prosperous man, and so he was easily persuaded that his practice had something to do with his good fortune. But how was it possible that it could be accepted as unlucky to turn back once after you started on a journey, no matter what might call you back, and why should it be unlucky to weigh a newborn baby? In some parts of the North of Ireland, we believe, it is considered unlucky to take a baby downstairs before it is first taken up stairs. And what put it into anybody's head to prescribe as a cure for the whooping cough, to put the child three times over and three times under an ass. This "cure" used to be believed in in formerly, but oddly enough, the same process was in Wicklow believed to be a cure for quinsey. I remember when I was a child in Tipperary being gravely warned against hitting any young animal with an elder switch, as to do so would retard its growth, and I remember seeing practised, and I believe with effect, the following odd cure for warts. First a pebble for every wart was put in a bag, and then it was cast out on the public road. A snail, "a shillakybooke" was rubbed on each wart, and then stuck on the spike of a blackthorn bush. As the snail withered the warts would disappear, and it, was generally believed that the warts went to whoever picked up the stones. We should naturally expect to find superstitions lingering in the remote parts of the country, but it is curious to find that many were until recently rife in the county Wicklow. Here we find the Tipperary one for whooping cough was regarded as a positive cure for a child suffering from quinsey. For St Anthony's Fire the rather odd curs was the blood of people bearing a certain name by no means confined to Wicklow county, and which is withheld lest some sufferer might be tempted to do some amateur blood-letting at their expense. Faith in the power of certain parties by malignant agencies to take away the milk from cows was believed in as firmly here as in any other part of Ireland, and not so very long ago a man named Hopkins earned his living by counteracting these agencies, and it is said with invariabie success. Here too, until recently, twelve candles stuck in a newly baked cake were lighted on twelfth night. and this cake was preserved to the end of the year, and a bit of it was believed to be a complete remedy for any pain suffered by either man or beast. But doubtless this custom and belief also prevailed in other counties, and originally was in the nature of a religious observance. People, as a rule, will not readily admit that they believe in the good people, but I remember an old friend of mine in Tipperary, a well to do farmer, who is long since gone over to the majority, who admitted to me on one occasion that he was unwilling to enlarge his house in a certain direction because of anything happening: that, is, if a cow perished, or a child died, all the neighbours would say it was became he interfered with a fairy rath. He preferred to dread the tongues of the neighbours, but I am firmly convinced he was really afraid of the malice of the good people. Recently, I read an account of a sturdy old cattle dealer who lived in Templepatrick in the North, who had no faith whatever in pishogues, and who discovered that the soil of a fairy fort on his farm would make capital top dressing for the land. He accordingly set his men to work to dig it up and cart it away. But on the very first night one of his cows died without apparent cause. Not heeding the warning, the work went on the second day, but that night three cows died. Still the old sceptic would not give in, although there were some ominous murmurings in his family. So the work went on the third day, but on that night five more cows died. This was too much for the farmer. He not only stopped the work, but carted back to the fort all the earth which had bean removed, but I have not been able to gather whether the fairies have since returned to their desecrated haunt. But midsummer eve is approaching, and that of all eves is the eve when the true believer may see little people footing it featly within their charmed circles, and let us hope, if only to show that they were satisfied with the act of restitution by the northern farmer, they will resume their dances and their merry making within the fort, the demolition of which they had so severely avenged.


https://britishnewspaperarchive.co.uk/viewer/bl/0000101/18950714/012/0002
Reynolds's Newspaper - Sunday 14 July 1895

THE VITALITY OF SUPERSTITION.

TO THE EDITOR OF REYNOLDS'S NEWSPAPER.

SIR,—I think that the Clonmel witch-burning case is a disgrace to the age in which we live. The whole of the land was startled and amazed when the details of that terrible outrage first appeared in the English papers, It was looked upon as a gross exaggeration upon the part of the newspapers. Unhappily the details given at the Coroner's inquest placed it beyond any doubt that a man had roasted his wife to death to get the so-called witches out of her, and that a number of men had calmly looked on without interfering while that was being done. The conduct of the onlookers was, if anything, worse than that of the ignorant madman who subjected his wife to the terrible ordeal of fire. Had the Court been under the impression that the man wanted to get rid of his wife, and that he had merely vamped up the witch theory as an excuse, he would, undoubtedly, have been hanged. The Court, however, took the milder view of the case that he had acted in superstitious ignorance, and the charge was reduced to manslaughter.

It is, of course, unjust to the Irish people to judge them by a case of this kind, though that is the tendency of the world. There are many good people in that unfortunate country who look with sorrow and abhorrence on the whole business. That such a thing could occur, however, shows that there is something radically wrong. The beneficent light of learning has unfortunately been denied to many of the rural residents in the sister kingdom, where the people have for so long been held in bondage that they have not yet become civilized. The education imparted to them is not of a character to dispel superstition, but raiher to foster it, and from this cause arises mach of the trouble of unfortunate Ireland. An educated Irishman is one of the brightest intellects of the age, but the contrast is painfully clear when knowledge has been doled out with a begrudging hand, and when it is hampered with the tie of religious teaching. In the latter case you have a naturally impulsive man with no light of reasoning or knowledge to guide or restrain him.

People who live in glass houses, it is said, should not throw stones, and we may be told to look at home in this England of ours. Day by day we have instances of gross superstition at home, but I cannot call to mind any case in which in modern days a man deliberately roasted his wife (while others looked on) simply because he believed she was bewitched. We have, however, had a number of cases in which women have gone to designing women and fortune-tellers and paid money to learn something about their future. Quite recently, in fact, we have had an example of the way in which so-called ladies have paid money to gaze into a crystal in order to gain some knowledge of their husbands, lovers, or rivals, We have quite a big bevy of men and women who are content to follow each other like a lot of sheep, and sit for an hour or so while some designing knave initiates them into the mysteries of what is called Spiritualism. You. Cannot argue with these people. They are beyond argument and they fall an easy prey to every unscrupulous adventurer who lets his hair grow long and adopts a vocabulary of strong sounding words without any meaning. There is no excuse for these people, because, as a rule, they have been educated; but it is possible to frame some kind of plea for the ignorant servant girl who gives an old woman 1s. 6d. or 2s. to learn whether her sweetheart will be light or dark. The law very naturally punishes the knaves who trade upon the credulity of servant girls whenever they are found out, but the Spiritualist fraud goes unpunished. The age seems peculiarly ripe for refined forms of superstition. Every third man or woman we meet would refuse to go under a ladder and not a few would be stricken with terror at the idea of going under a ladder. We all know people who would he horrified beyond measure at the idea of breaking a looking-glass, while crossed knives are as fatal to the happiness of others as sitting down thirteen to dinner.

No amount of reasoning, argument, or talking seems to be of use in combating these ideas. The Thirteen Club, the members of which pitch salt overboard, cross their knives, pass under ladlers, break looking-glasses, and do other dreadful things when they dine, do not seem to make any great progress. You could not convince a sailor that no dreadful pains and penalties attach to sailing on a Friday, and that statistics show that, as a fact, it is one of the best days of the %week to venture out. Religious scruples probably lie at the root of this particular form of superstition, but it is difficult to trace the reason for dire vengeance of fourteen years' duration which is supposed to wait upon those who break a looking-glass.

The folk lore of all countries is based upon superstition, but, with the exception of Ireland and some parts of Scotland and Wales, the fairies and the elves, the ugly dwarfs and the wicked sprites have passed into pretty legendary poetry and stories. It is sad to think that in some parts of the Sister Isle the sunrise of intelligence has been so long delayed. The Clonmel witch-burning case should have formed the theme of a sermon in every parish throughout the land.

NORTHUMBRIAN.

---


It is perhaps not surprising that an account of the affair appeared quite promptly in the *The Transactions of the Folk-Lore Society*, aka. *Folk-Lore, the Quarterly Review of Myth, Tradition and Custom*.

https://archive.org/details/publications11britgoog/page/372/mode/2up?q=changeling

Folklore
VOL. VI. — no. IV, December — 1895

pp.373-384

THE "WITCH-BURNING" AT CLONMEL.

The interest of many of the details disclosed in the recent trial, and the preliminary proceedings before the magistrates of Clonmel, has moved the Council of the Society to direct that the following analysis of the evidence shall be printed, so as to preserve the relevant facts in a form accessible to scientific students.

In the month of March last rumours were afloat in the neighbourhood concerning the mysterious disappearance of Bridget Cleary, aged about twenty-six years, the wife of Michael Cleary, residing at Ballyvadlea, a remote and isolated district a short distance from Cloneen, between that village and Mullinahone, in the county of Tipperary. Ultimately Michael Cleary, Patrick Boland (father of Bridget Cleary), John Dunne, Patrick, James, Michael, and Mary Kennedy, and William Ahearne were brought before the magistrates, charged with assaulting and illtreating Bridget Cleary on the 14th March, and causing her actual bodily harm. Her body had not then been found. The prisoners were remanded, and search was made for the missing woman. On Friday, the 22nd March, the body was discovered, buried in a cramped position, in a piece of swampy land about a quarter of a mile from Cleary's house. An inquest was held and the jury returned a verdict of death caused by extensive burns. These burns, as the evidence showed, were on the abdomen, the lower part of the back, and the left hand.

On the resumption of the magisterial inquiry, in addition to the prisoners already named, William Kennedy and Denis Ganey, a herb-doctor, were also included in the charge. All the Kennedys were cousins of the deceased, except Mary Kennedy, who was her aunt. The report of the proceedings in *The Irish Times* of the 26th, 27th, 28th March, and the 2nd, 3rd, 6th and 8th April last, is here followed.

The most important witness for the Crown was Mrs. Johannah Burke, wife of a labourer residing at Rath Kenney near the Clearys. She stated that on the night of Thursday, the 14th March, she went up to see Mrs. Cleary, who was ill, and met William Simpson and his wife outside the door of the house, which was locked. Witness asked for admittance, but Michael Cleary said they would not open the door. While they remained outside they stood at the window. They heard someone inside saying: 'Take it, you ———,' or 'witch.' When the door was opened, witness went in and saw Dunne and three of the Kennedys holding Mrs. Cleary down on her bed by her hands and feet, and her husband was giving her herbs and milk in a spoon out of a saucepan. They forced her to take the herbs, and Cleary asked her: 'Are you Mary Boland, the wife of Michael Cleary, in the name of God?' She answered it once or twice, and her father asked a similar question. Michael Cleary [witness thought] then threw a certain liquid on his wife. They put the question to her again, and she used to repeat the words after them. John Dunne then said: 'Hold her over the fire, and she will soon answer.' Dunne, Cleary and P. Kennedy then lifted Mrs. Cleary off the bed, and placed her in a kind of sitting position over the kitchen fire, which was a slow one. Mrs. Cleary's appearance had greatly changed. She seemed to be wild and deranged, especially while they were so treating her. While they held her over the fire, she had only her nightdress and chemise on. They repeated the question, and she answered: 'I am Bridget Boland, daughter of Pat Boland, in the name of God.' She screamed and cried out to me: 'Oh Han, Han!' They put her back to bed . . . Nothing more happened when they put her back to bed about 11 o'clock. They all stayed in the house till next morning at 6 o'clock, except Dunne and Ahearne, who went after two o'clock. Mrs. Cleary never went to sleep. She was nervous and not sensible. At one time she said: 'The police are at the window; let you mind me now.'"

The following evening the witness went with her daughter Katty to Cleary's house, and found Bridget Cleary in bed. The witness prepared some milk for her. Later on, "Mrs. Cleary asked her husband if I was paid for the milk. I said 'Yes,' and showed her the shilling, which she took and put under the blankets, and gave it back again in a minute. Subsequently, when Mrs. Cleary was sitting at the fire with her husband, he said she had rubbed the shilling to her leg. She got angry at that, and said she did not rub it to her leg — that there were no 'pishrogues' about her." Other persons came into the house, among them several of the accused; and Bridget Cleary was dressed and brought down to the kitchen. "Her father, my brother and myself, and deceased and her husband sat at the fire. They were talking about the fairies, and Mrs. Cleary said to her husband, 'Your mother used to go with the fairies, and that is why you think I am going with them.' He asked her, 'Did my mother tell you that?' She said, 'She did; that she gave two nights with them.' I made tea, and offered Bridget Cleary a cup of it. Her husband got three bits of bread and jam, and said she should eat them before she should take a sup. He asked her three times: 'Are you Bridget Cleary, my wife, in the name of God?' She answered twice, and ate two pieces of bread and jam. When she did not answer the third time he forced her to eat the third bit, saying, 'If you won't take it, down you will go.' He flung her on the ground, put his knee on her chest, one hand. on her throat, and forced the bit of bread and jam down her throat, saying 'Swallow it. Is it down? Is it down?' .... I said, 'Mike, let her alone, don't you see it is Bridget that is in it?' meaning that it was Bridget his wife, and not the fairy, for he suspected that it was a fairy and not his wife that was there. Michael Cleary then stripped his wife's clothes off, except her chemise, and got a lighting stick out of the fire. She was lying on the floor, and he held it near her mouth. My mother and brothers and myself wanted to leave the house when he flung her on the floor, but Michael Cleary had the key of the door in his pocket, and said the door would not be opened until he got his wife back." According to the report, District Inspector Wansborough, who was prosecuting, then asked a shamefully leading question, which would not have been tolerated in an English court of justice; but different principles prevail in Irish courts: "'Did you see him throw the lamp oil on her?' — I did ... 'Did she say anything when she was burning?' — She did. She turned and called out to me, in a mournful tone, 'Oh Han, Han!' — 'What did you reply?' — I endeavoured to get out for the peelers. My brother, when he could not get the key, went up into the other room, and fell in a weakness. My mother threw Easter water on him.— 'Where was Bridget Cleary all this time?' — She was burning on the hearth. The house was full of smoke and smell. I had to go up to the room. I could not stand. When I looked down to the kitchen I saw the remains of Bridget Cleary on the floor, lying on a sheet. She was lying on her face, and her legs turned upwards as if they had contracted in the burning." The unfortunate woman was then dead. Michael Cleary came up into the room where the witness was and fetched a large sack. "He said, 'Hold your tongue, Hannah. It is not Bridget I am burning. You will soon see her go up in the chimney.' He went down to the kitchen with the sack, and when I looked down again the body had been burned. When she was burning, Michael Cleary screamed out, 'She is burned now, but God knows I did not mean to do it. I may thank Jack Dunne for all of it.'" Cleary and witness's brother Patrick then took the body away to bury it.

Some additional particulars were given by other witnesses who were called to corroborate this hideous story. Katie Burke, a little girl, daughter of the previous witness said that Michael Cleary knocked his wife down when she would not eat the third bit of bread. Then he got a red stump and told her he would put it down her mouth if she would not eat the bit. She did not eat it. Then he caught her and laid her on the fire. Then she took fire. He got lamp-oil and put it on her and she blazed up. When she was burning James and William Kennedy roared for the key, and they did not get it. William Kennedy and Mrs. Burke tried to get the key. . . . Then they went in the room and witness heard Michael Cleary say: 'Go up the chimney!' but did not know what name he called her. Mrs. Cleary was burning, and witness saw a sheet on the floor."

William Simpson of Ballyvadlea, caretaker, who, it will be remembered, met Mrs. Burke outside the door of Cleary's cottage on Thursdary evening, was examined on 1st April and said, among other things: "He could not say who opened the door. As he went in he heard loud shouts of 'Away she go, away she go!' He could not say who said that. The men who were holding the deceased were saying it. . . . John Dunne was holding her by the head; Pat Kennedy was holding her arm on the right side; James was holding her on the left side; William Kennedy was holding her by the legs. . . Deceased was lying upon her back. . . . She appeared to be in pain. She shouted and screamed a little at that time. She screamed more afterwards than she did then. . . . Mrs. Cleary's husband was standing by the bed. He was holding a saucepan in both hands. He asked deceased: 'Are you Bridget Boland, the wife of Michael Cleary, in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost?' She made some reply to the effect 'Yes, I am.' . . . The questions were repeated several times: she only answered a few times. Witness saw Michael Cleary afterwards giving his wife some liquids in a spoon out of the saucepan." Asked what was in the saucepan, witness said: "I don't know, but I heard that it was herbs. I did not hear that anything else was in it. I heard Michael Cleary say that he got some herbs from Ganey. . . . Cleary was forcing the herbs into the mouth of the deceased. She resisted by keeping her mouth closed. The liquid was forced in. Besides this, water `[According to the Cork Examiner and other reports, this is called "a certain noxious fluid." Mr. Leland L.Duncan writes: "I specially noted the phrase for enquiry this summer. I found the good folk of Leitrim full of the case, and they told me several little similar tales. From these it appears that the great charm for getting people back from 'the good people' is to throw over them a concoction of strong urine and hen's excrement. This choice compound, or at any rate part of it, is evidently here the 'certain noxious fluid'."]` was thrown on her. This was called for by Michael Cleary, and was fetched by Mary Kennedy from an adjoining room. This was brought three or four times, and the process of throwing it on her lasted at intervals over a period of ten or twenty minutes. The father and husband were both asking her questions in the meantime. They apparently repeated again and again the question above-mentioned. There were now thirteen persons in the room, including the witness. Colonel Evanson, the presiding magistrate, asked: "'What were they there for, in your opinion?' — To hunt away the witches and fairies. The door was open for that purpose. I don't know that they came for that purpose, but when they were there they were at that work. I went to see Mrs. Cleary." The witness was asked: "'Did not Mrs. Cleary at all reply to the questions put to her?' — She did when she was on the fire. Her father asked her: 'Are you the daughter of Patrick Boland, wife of Michael Cleary? Answer in the name of God.' She answered: 'I am, dada.' Her husband asked her a similar question then, and she said: 'Yes, I am.' Those questions were answered repeatedly by her. They were then satisfied that they had their own. — 'What do you mean by that?' — That they had Mrs. Cleary, and not a witch. — 'Then what had they got before?' — They believed that they had a witch. About twenty minutes before she was taken off the bed she screamed terribly. That was when the medicine went down. They also shook her then, and slapped her hands. The same men held her from start to finish. When they were shaking her they all said: 'Away with you! Come home, Bridget Boland, in the name of God!' `[According to some of the reports "a man at each side of the bed kept the body swinging about the whole time." Mr. Duncan says: "There is evidently some virtue in the swinging business. I was told that one way of getting a child back was to seat it on a shovel and swing it out of the door back and forward, saying: 'If you're a fairy, away with you!' You should also, previous to this little ceremony, give it lusmore (foxglove), three drops on the tongue and three in each ear. This explains the herb so frequently mentioned."]` After deceased was removed from the fire and fresh clothing put on her, she was then asked by her husband did she know the persons standing around her, and she said 'Yes.' He showed her one of the Kennedys in particular and asked her what relation was he to her, and she said her first cousin. And he asked her in turn did she know each person in the room, and she said she did. They were all satisfied then that they had her. They were all speaking and saying: 'Do you think it is her that is here?' And the answer would be 'Yes'; and they were all delighted at it." All this took place on Thursday, the 14th March, the first of the two days spoken of by Mrs. Burke. Simpson gave further important evidence. Witness saw Michael Cleary on the road on the same day that he heard Mrs. Cleary was missing [apparently Saturday, the 16th March], and again on the Sunday following. Cleary said that his wife left the house at 12 o'clock on Friday night. Witness believed him. He saw Cleary again about 7 or 8 o'clock that evening. He asked witness for the loan of a revolver. He said that those parties who had convinced him about his wife would not go with him to the fort." Asked what was meant by that, the witness said: "It appeared to me that they had convinced him that his wife had gone to the fort— 'What was the fort?' — The fort at Kylenagranagh Hill. It appeared to me that they had convinced him that his wife had gone with fairies, and as they had convinced him so far he should see it out with them. — 'He wanted a revolver to force them to go?' — Yes. The fort was reported to be a fairies' habitation. Cleary said he expected to meet her at the fort. — 'Did he say how he expected her to appear?' — He said she would be riding a grey horse, and she had told him so. And he said that they should cut the ropes that were tying her on the saddle, and she would then stay with him if he was able to keep her. Witness did not lend him a revolver, but afterwards saw Cleary with a big table-knife in his pocket to go to the fort with."

Mary Simpson, wife of William Simpson, corroborated these statements. She also said that when the door was opened, on the Thursday evening, and she and her husband went in with Mrs. Burke and her daughter, she heard the men inside then say: "Away she goes, away she goes!" as though they were driving something out of the house. It appeared to her that they did not believe Mrs. Cleary was there, and that they wanted to drive away what was in the bed. . . . They thought it was a witch, but I did not." She further stated that when Cleary was giving his wife the herbs he said: "Take that, in the name of God," and "Bridget Cleary come back to me in the name of God!"

The Rev. Cornelius F. Ryan "deposed that he was curate of the parish of Drangan. The Clearys were members of his congregation, and under his spiritual charge. He had known them for about a year and a half, and never observed any signs of mental derangement in Mrs. Cleary until he attended her almost immediately before her death, on the 13th March. As far as he could say, she and her husband were living on good terms with each other. When he visited her on the afternoon of the 13th she was in bed. She appeared to be in a very nervous state, and, as he thought possibly hysterical, he came to the conclusion that

it might be the beginning of mental derangement. She did not converse with him except as a priest; and her conversation was quite coherent and intelligible." Mr. Ryan administered the last rites of the church to her on that occasion; and on Friday morning, the 15th, he came again, being summoned by Cleary, and celebrated Mass in her room. A piece of evidence follows which ought to be carefully borne in mind, especially in reference to denials by ministers of religion of the existence of superstitious practices and beliefs in their neighbourhood. The witness was asked by the District Inspector: "Is it possible that you heard nothing of these proceeding about witchcraft?" And he replied: "Up to the time [sic] I heard nothing — absolutely nothing!" "Don't you think that very extraordinary?" enquired the Inspector. "No," he replied, "I do not. The priest is very often the last to hear of things like that — generally, I should say. I heard a rumour on the Saturday after, that Mrs. Cleary had disappeared mysteriously. I had no suspicion of foul play or witchcraft, and if I had I should have at once absolutely refused to say Mass in the house, and have given information to the police at once."

Dr. Crean gave evidence that he attended the deceased on the 13th March and found her suffering from a slight bronchial catarrh and nervous excitement.

Ultimately, all the prisoners except Ganey (who was discharged) were committed for trial on the charge of wilful murder.

A few extracts may be added from the statements made by the prisoners on their committal. Boland, among other things, said: "Said Cleary to me: 'Have you any faith? Don't you know it is with an old witch I am sleeping?' I said: 'You are not. You are sleeping with my daughter.'" Mary Kennedy "said that on Wednesday she was sent for by Michael Cleary to go down and see his wife. She went down and saw her, and she complained of suffering from a pain in her head. She said that Michael Cleary was making a fairy of her, and that he had tried to burn her three months ago.'" John Dunne stated that after the murder Cleary told him: "She was not my wife. She was too fine to be my wife. She was two inches taller than my wife." After going to the priest on Sunday, Cleary "asked him (Dunne) would he go look for her to the fort that evening. He replied that he would not; that that was only moonshine. Cleary said that he was sure that the woman was there; that it was not his wife that he burned." James Kennedy stated that "they," meaning apparently his brother William, Cleary and himself, "went three nights to the fort at Kylenagranagh, but did not see anything."

The trial took place at Clonmel on the 4th and 5th July last, before Mr. Justice O'Brien and a jury. No further illustration of the superstition was elicited save what follows, taken from the evidence of Mrs. Burke, reported in *The Irish Times* of the 6th July. On cross-examination by Dr. Falconer, witness said she was in Cleary's house when Cleary said to William Simpson that the house was full of fairies. That was on Thursday. He said that not one fairy was going out of the door, but several. 'At the time the body was burned was the Rosary said?' — Yes. At the time the body was laid on the sheet my mother said: 'In the name of God, let you go anywhere and say the Rosary. It was the devil that whispered it into his ears.' Cleary then said to Dunne: 'I have something here that will make her all right.' Dunne said: 'It is not to-day you have a right to get anything for her; it is not in Fethard you had a right to be for a doctor. Three days ago you had a right to be beyond with Ganey, for the doctor had nothing to do with her. It is not your wife is there. You will have enough to do to bring her back. This is the eighth day, and you had a right to have gone to Ganey on the fifth day.' He added that the herbs should be given to her on the fifth day. — 'Did he mention the name of the herb? Did he say it was lusmore?' — No; he said it was the seventh brother of the seventh sister, or the seventh sister of the seventh brother, or something like that. He said that was the last herb that could be given to her; and he said it would either kill or cure. He had herbs in his hand; and he gave instructions to Michael Cleary to boil them, and make the sign of the cross, and go round the house making pishrogues. Cleary asked Dunne was he doing it right, and Dunne said he was. Then Cleary went round the house making pishrogues and charms. Dunne whispered to Cleary, so that I should not hear what the charm was. Cleary made no fairy of her; it was all Dunne's fault. Cleary was fond of his wife and had the priest to attend her." `[Here it was obvious, as the judge pointed out to the jury, that the witness was trying to screen her relative Cleary at the expense of Dunne.]`

The result of the trial was that all the prisoners were found guilty of manslaughter and sentenced to various terms of penal servitude and imprisonment, the sentence on Cleary being that of twenty years' penal servitude.

It is not intended here to discuss the details of the superstitions alluded to by the witnesses, as to which many interesting questions arise. Be it sufficient to point out that though the word *witch* is frequently used, it is abundantly clear that, whether Cleary was or was not himself a dupe (as to which a careful reading of the evidence may suggest a doubt), the majority of the prisoners were at first under the impression that Bridget Cleary had been taken away by the fairies and a changeling substituted, though this impression seems to have been removed from the minds of most of them after she was placed on the fire on the Thursday evening.

It would only seem necessary to add a protest, in the interest of the due administration of the law, against the article by Mr. E. F. Benson in the *Nineteenth Century* for June last. Some of Mr. Benson's interpretations of the evidence before the magistrates are disputable; but whether they are right or wrong is not the point. The article in question was published before the trial. It was an attempt to influence public opinion upon a case that was still *sub judice*. And, however unlikely to reach the jurymen who would have to try the guilt of the prisoners, it ought not to have been published at that time.


--


https://archive.org/details/sim_twentieth-century_1895-06_37_220/page/1052/mode/2up?q=Benson
The Nineteenth Century  1895-06: Vol 37 Iss 220

pp.1053-1058

THE RECENT 'WITCH-BURNING' AT CLONMEL

THERE seems to be no doubt, if we examine the motives which appear to have led to this crime, that the ten persons, nine of whom are to be tried on the capital charge of wilfully murdering Bridget Cleary, in the recent case of witch-burning at Clonmel, acted, if we may use such a word in connection with so ghastly a tragedy, honestly, and, as they undoubtedly appear to have believed, for the best.

This cruel and unnatural murder, as at first sight the crime seems to be, was committed deliberately, in cold blood, and throughout the preliminary examination no evidence, however slight, tended to indicate that either the woman's father, her husband, or any of those concerned in it were actuated by anger, malice, or motives of gain. The account given on all sides of the reasons for inflicting the tortures which eventually caused the death of this woman, with whom, apparently, all parties concerned were on the best of terms, are both too fantastic on the one hand, and, on the other, too authentically based on what was at one time a very widely spread superstition, to have been invented. That such a superstition should still be so deeply ingrained in the minds of these peasants as to lead in practice to so horrible a deed seems surprising enough on first sight, and becomes doubly surprising when we consider to how primitive a stratum of belief it belongs.

It appears from evidence given at the committal that Bridget Cleary, in consequence of certain nervous, excited symptoms which she had exhibited, was forced to swallow certain herbs, was beaten and burned, and was repeatedly asked the question, 'In the name of God, are you Bridget Cleary?' During this treatment she received the injuries of which she died, but it is, I think, quite clear that the men neither wished nor meant to kill her. All the witnesses, who on important points entirely corroborated each other, agreed in saying that the object of this treatment was to drive out from her body the fairy which had taken possession of it, and which exhibited its presence by her nervous disorder. The woman's own soul would then be able to return.

This is not, then, a case of witch-burning at all. Bridget Cleary, they believed, was possessed, and they tried by violent means to make the invading spirit come out of her. But what is more convincing than the testimony of all the witnesses is the fact that they were acting strictly in accordance with a primitive and savage superstition.

However, the woman died, and we notice that after her death, which I hope to show was entirely unpremeditated and undesired, the prescription as it were having failed to act, these men fell back on another very common superstition. They do not seem ever to have been thoroughly convinced that they had succeeded in driving the spirit out of the woman's body, and when she died they still hoped that it was the possessing spirit they had killed, and believed that the real Bridget Cleary would return, sitting on a grey or white horse, the reins of which would have to be cut to enable her to come back. According to the latest accounts this is still believed, and men wait in the 'fairy inhabitance' for the coming of the white horse that will bear Bridget Cleary.

Now, these two superstitions are quite distinct, and must be completely dissociated from one another. The second one only comes into notice after her death, when, being still unconvinced that they had driven the spirit out, the men concluded that she was body and soul a changeling. But while they were burning and beating her it is quite clear they did not think that she was a changeling, but that a fairy had taken possession of her body. This changeling idea is common enough among early superstitious beliefs—though it is somewhat rare for an adult to be changed, the victims being usually children—and is particularly common among Teutonic peoples. But it is that which possessed these men's minds (for truly it was they who were possessed, not she) as they were torturing her which I propose to examine, for it carries us back to a stratum of belief belonging altogether to a primitive and savage era. Also, as I have said, it can, I think, be made evident that this is not a case of witch-burning at all, and ought to be called manslaughter rather than murder.

Primitive man knows nothing about germs, microbes, nerves, or laws of nature, and when the simplest and most evident of natural phenomena, like disease, death, or storm, are brought before his notice, he forms an equally simple and natural theory about them when he refers them, as he invariably does, to the work of some malignant spirit. To the savage, and to primitive religion generally, the idea of a purely beneficent god is altogether foreign. To him life, health, and the supplies of the simpler means of life are the normal conditions of his consciousness; sickness, famine, and death the abnormal, the work of some external agency, obviously malignant. And we herefore find that the earliest conceptions which he forms about the forces over which he has no control represent them as entirely evil, interfering in the normal and beneficent course of events.

That the idea of external agencies being malignant should belong to the earliest stages of religious belief is natural enough, for evil is more readily referred to a cause than its opposite. The destruction of a crop by a thunderstorm, for instance, is easily traceable to the malignant spirit in the thunderstorm; whereas the slow ripening of wheat under the kindly influence of sun and rain is a more subtle phenomenon, because it is a less evident process, the workings of which are altogether hidden from him, and a more natural one, since, on the whole, wheat ripens more often than it fails to do so. Health, again, is naturally regarded as normal, and when disease attacks a town it is obviously due to a demon of disease, an evil hostile power, whereas health cannot be definitely referred to any one cause. Similarly, recovery and convalescence are but a reversion to normal conditions, due to the cessation of the action of the demon who sent the disease.

This theory accounts for the undeniable fact that a purely healing cult finds no place in any system of early religious belief. The primary function of the spirit who is concerned with such matters is, not to remove, but to send disease, though, in a secondary manner, he is regarded as being able to remove it, inasmuch as he can stop sending it. But by degrees, as spirits pass from being considered the enemies into becoming the friends of: man, prayer and sacrifice begin to be offered to them, that they may confer directly prosperity and health, and remove evils not necessarily of their own sending. In other words, the secondary function of primitive gods becomes at a later stage their primary function. So, also, the sorcerer, who was the medium between man and the malignant spirit, and who induced him to send disease and death, while remaining his medium, becomes the priest of the god of health and life, and induces him to restore his suppliants to strength.

Now, the earlier of these two stages brings us back to the most primitive and elementary forms of belief, and it is to such a stage of belief that the death of Bridget Cleary is to be referred. Evil agencies are at work about mankind to injure, to destroy, and particularly to take possession, and they must be fought against in all their manifestations. The idea confronts us most prominently and immediately in the methods by which savages deal with disease, and in the functions exercised by their doctors. A few instances will suffice to illustrate this point.

The Patagonians regard all disease as possession by an evil spirit, `[Denny's Folklore of China.]` and in Australia illness used to be considered due to the agency of ghosts of dead men, who gnawed the livers of the living. Similarly, in Spain epilepsy was considered to be possession by a devil, who had to be exorcised `[Tylor, Anthropology, pp. 354, 355.]`; and the same ideais found in the Gospels, Again, among the Veddahs of Ceylon medicine is never administered to sick men, but offerings are made to the demon who has sent the disease. `[Transactions of Ethnological Society, N. S., vol. ii. (Bailey).]`

In accordance with this idea, we find that in many savage tribes the priests or sorcerers are the only doctors. In Tonquin, the magicians, who were the medium between the malignant spirits and man, could also drive out disease. `[Churchills Voyages, vol. v. pp. 28, 135, 366.]` In the Bodo and Dhimal tribes of North-east India the exorcists who can drive out disease are priests of the tormenting deity. `[Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii. p. 119.]` Again, among the Vancouver Indians the doctor used to pommel his patient in order to drive the spirit out, while all the family beat sticks together, in order to frighten it away. `[Trans. Eth. Soc., N. S., vol. iv. p. 288]` So, too, in Western Australia, the doctor or sorcerer, here, as in so many places, identical, used to run round and round his patient, shouting as loud as he could, in order to frighten the possessing spirit away. `[Lubbock, Origin of Civilisation, p. 25.]` In other parts of Australia the idea of death by disease appears to have been incomprehensible. If not the result of violence, it was always attributed to the possession of a spirit, in most cases a demon called 'Brewin,' who is like the wind, and has to be exorcised. One of the Kurnai, for instance, who cures his father of colic, does so by calling 'Brewin' opprobrious names until he quits his body. `[Fison and Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai, p. 250.]` Again, in Cambodia the Steins make a great noise day and night round the beds of their sick in order to drive the possessing spirit away, and the Dacotas rattle gourds and shout for the same purpose. `[Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii. p. 18.]` So, too, in Malabar, when a man was ill, the magicians, who were also the doctors, used to beat drums and basins round him, and blow on trumpets, in order to eject the tormenting spirit. `[Churchill's Voyages, vol. vi. p. 160.]` Again, the Hottentots of the Cape of Good Hope used to 'shake, joit, and pommel' a dying man in a final effort to drive the spirit of disease out of him. `[Sparman's Voyages, vol. i. p. 310.]` But invariably, as time advances, these demons, originally malignant, and treated as enemies, to be got rid of by force and hostility, are found to be amenable to gentler means. In New Guinea, for instance, we find that the doctors used to paint their patient all over with bright colours, in order to please the spirit which possessed him, and induce him to come out. `[Lubbock, Origin of Civilisation, p. 25.]` He is still malignant, but can be approached in a friendly manner. A similar custom has been noticed among the Chippewa Indians, who, when an inmate of the lodge is sick, procure a sapling, and tie various coloured threads to it, which are deemed acceptable to the *manito*, who has sent the sickness as a mark of his displeasure. `[Schoolcraft, Thirty Years with Indian Tribes, p. 101.]` This growing familiarity with spirits originally malignant, and their gradual change towards beneficence, has been traced on the Gold Coast. The natives there used to have a deity called Abroh-ku, a malicious god who lived in the sea-surf, and whose sole functions were to upset the canoes of his worshippers. But when they got to know him better he was found to be friendly, and now he raises the wave which carries them in safety to the shore. `[Ellis, Tshi-speaking People of the Gold Coast, p. 45.]`

Now, all the details of the death of Bridget Cleary point to the earliest stage in such beliefs, when the possessing spirit was thought to be purely malignant, and had to be forcibly ejected. What caused these men to imagine that she had been taken possession of by a fairy was the exhibition of certain nervous and excited symptoms. This, again, is well paralleled from the folk-lore of other nations. To take a few instances: among the Zulus there are spirits, called *amatongo*, supposed to be the ghosts of ancestors. A man possessed by them exhibits hysterical symptoms, which are regarded as a sign of possession. `[Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii. 120.]` Among Siberian tribes, children liable to convulsions are looked upon as being possessed by the divining spirit. `[Ibid. 121.]` So, too, the priestess at Delphi passed into an epileptic trance before the oracular spirit descended on her, `[Pind. Pyth. iii. 2; Eur. Iph. Taur. 1250; Hyginus Fab. 53, &c.]` and the oracle of Trophonios produced hysterical laughter in those who consulted it.

A further confirmation of this theory as applied to this case is shown in the fact that the door was left open, in order that the ejected spirit might pass out. Had these men wished to murder the woman, the very last thing they would have done would be to leave the door open; but such a proceeding is entirely in accordance with the idea they had in their minds. Like the Hottentots, who 'jolt and pommel' a dying man in order to drive the spirit of disease out, so they beat and burned this wretched victim of superstition in order to expel the spirit that possessed her. Far from wishing to murder her, they wished to bring her back into the land of the living, and it seems that the remorse with which her husband was seized after her death was perfectly genuine. It is inconceivable that, if they had wished to kill her, they would have left the door open, that they should have allowed their shouts to attract the neighbours, or that ten persons should have been admitted to witness the deed. Terrible and ghastly as the case is, we cannot call it wilful murder.

After her death they were influenced by an entirely distinct and different superstition, one that is commoner to the country, less primitive, and more elaborate. They had been unable to completely satisfy themselves that the soul of the woman had returned to her body, and they fell back on the hope that they had killed, not Bridget Cleary, but a changeling which had been substituted for her. In neither case was murder present to their minds, for in the first stage their design was to bring her soul back to her body, and in the second they believed, and still seem to believe, that it was not she who was dead.

It seems, then, that whatever explanation we accept of the beliefs which led to Bridget Cleary's death, we cannot suppose that it was the purpose of these men to murder her. The account given of the matter by all the witnesses is too fantastic and too uniform not to be genuine. We cannot imagine that they, by pure chance, invented a course of reasoning to excuse their act which entirely tallies with a widely spread and primitive superstition, nor is there the smallest evidence to show that any of those motives which, for the most part, lead to murder were influencing, or had influenced, any of the actors. The story is too strange not to be true.

That such superstitions should still be believed in a Christian country, and by men who by religion are Christians, is appalling enough; but the remedy for such a state of things is not to be found in the hangman's noose, nor yet, perhaps, in the convict prison, and one cannot but feel that it would be in the spirit of that wise and merciful law which ordains that boys under a certain age may not be hanged for capital offences to spare these men, even if they are condemned; for children they are if, as can, I think, be proved, they have acted under the influence of such superstitious fears, as surely as the savage who fears his own shadow is a child. It is as impossible for educated and unsuperstitious people to appreciate the enormous force which such beliefs exercise on untutored minds as it is for a heathen to estimate the immense power of religion in determining the conduct of a man. But if, as this paper has tried to show, they killed, but not with intent to kill, still less should the extreme penalty be inflicted.

E. F. BENSON.

---

Nineteenth century magazine https://archive.org/details/pub_twentieth-century

Also see at (IA) links from: https://www.victorianresearch.org/openaccessperiodicals.html
